Real Patriots Ask Questions 
available, or decriminalizing marijuana are all experiments. 
Doing nothing to help Abyssinia against Italy, or to prevent Nazi 
Germany from invading the Rhineland was an experiment. Com-
munism in Eastern Europe, the Soviet Union and China was an 
experiment. Privatizing mental health care or prisons is an experi-
ment. Japan and West Germany investing a great deal in science 
and technology and next to nothing on defence - and finding that 
their economies boomed - was an experiment. Handguns are 
available for self-protection in Seattle, but not in nearby Vancou-
ver, Canada; handgun killings are five times more common in 
Seattle and the handgun suicide rate is ten times greater in Seattle. 
Guns make impulsive killing easy. This is also an experiment. In 
almost all of these cases, adequate control experiments are not 
performed, or variables are insufficiently separated. Nevertheless, 
to a certain and often useful degree, such ideas can be tested. The 
great waste would be to ignore the results of social experiments 
because they seem to be ideologically unpalatable. 
There is no nation on Earth today optimized for the middle of 
the twenty-first century. We face an abundance of subtle and 
complex problems. We need therefore subtle and complex solu-
tions. Since there is no deductive theory of social organization, 
our only recourse is scientific experiment - trying out sometimes 
on small scales (community, city and state level, say) a wide range 
of alternatives. One of the perquisites of power on becoming 
prime minister in China in the fifth century BC was that you got to 
construct a model state in your home district or province. It was 
Confucius' chief life failing, he lamented, that he never got to try. 
Even a casual scrutiny of history reveals that we humans have a 
sad tendency to make the same mistakes again and again. We're 
afraid of strangers or anybody who's a little different from us. 
When we get scared, we start pushing people around. We have 
readily accessible buttons that release powerful emotions when 
pressed. We can be manipulated into utter senselessness by clever 
politicians. Give us the right kind of leader and, like the most 
suggestible subjects of the hypnotherapists, we'll gladly do just 
about anything he wants - even things we know to be wrong. The 
framers of the Constitution were students of history. In recogni-
tion of the human condition, they sought to invent a means that 
397 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
would keep us free in spite of ourselves. 
Some of the opponents of the US Constitution insisted that it 
would never work; that a republican form of government spanning 
a land with 'such dissimilar climates, economies, morals, politics, 
and peoples,' as Governor George Clinton of New York said, was 
impossible; that such a government and such a Constitution, as 
Patrick Henry of Virginia declared, 'contradicts all the experience 
of the world'. The experiment was tried anyway. 
Scientific findings and attitudes were common in those who 
invented the United States. The supreme authority, outranking 
any personal opinion, any book, any revelation, was - as the 
Declaration of Independence puts it - 'the laws of nature and of 
nature's GOD'. Dr Benjamin Franklin was revered in Europe and 
America as the founder of the new field of electrical physics. At 
the Constitutional Convention of 1789 John Adams repeatedly 
appealed to the analogy of mechanical balance in machines; 
others to William Harvey's discovery of the circulation of the 
blood. Late in life Adams wrote, 'All mankind are chemists from 
their cradles to their graves . . . The Material Universe is a 
chemical experiment.' James Madison used chemical and biologi-
cal metaphors in The Federalist Papers. The American revolution-
aries were creatures of the European Enlightenment which 
provides an essential background for understanding the origins 
and purpose of the United States. 
'Science and its philosophical corollaries,' wrote the American 
historian Clinton Rossiter 
were perhaps the most important intellectual force shaping 
the destiny of eighteenth-century America . . . Franklin was 
only one of a number of forward-looking colonists who 
recognized the kinship of scientific method and democratic 
procedure. Free inquiry, free exchange of information, opti-
mism, self-criticism, pragmatism, objectivity - all these ingre-
dients of the coming republic were already active in the 
republic of science that flourished in the eighteenth century. 
Thomas Jefferson was a scientist. That's how he described him-
self. When you visit his home at Monticello, Virginia, the moment 


Real Patriots Ask Questions 
you enter its portals you find ample evidence of his scientific 
interests - not just in his immense and varied library, but in 
copying machines, automatic doors, telescopes and other instru-
ments, some at the cutting edge of early nineteenth-century tech-
nology. Some he invented, some he copied, some he purchased. He 
compared the plants and animals in America with Europe's, uncov-
ered fossils, used the calculus in the design of a new plough. He 
mastered Newtonian physics. Nature destined him, he said, to be a 
scientist, but there were no opportunities for scientists in pre-
revolutionary Virginia. Other, more urgent, needs took precedence. 
He threw himself into the historic events that were transpiring 
around him. Once independence was won, he said, later generations 
could devote themselves to science and scholarship. 
Jefferson was an early hero of mine, not because of his scientific 
interests (although they very much helped to mould his political 
philosophy), but because he, almost more than anyone else, was 
responsible for the spread of democracy throughout the world. The 
idea - breathtaking, radical and revolutionary at the time (in many 
places in the world, it still is) is that not kings, not priests, not big city 
bosses, not dictators, not a military cabal, not a de facto conspiracy of 
the wealthy, but ordinary people, working together, are to rule the 
nations. Not only was Jefferson a leading theoretician of this cause; 
he was also involved in the most practical way, helping to bring about 
the great American political experiment that has, all over the world, 
been admired and emulated since. 
He died at Monticello on 4 July 1826, fifty years to the day after 
the colonies issued that stirring document, written by Jefferson, 
called the Declaration of Independence. It was denounced by 
conservatives worldwide. Monarchy, aristocracy and state-supported 
religion - that's what conservatives were defending then. In a letter 
composed a few days before his death, he wrote that it was the 'light 
of science' that had demonstrated that 'the mass of mankind has not 
been born with saddles on their backs', nor were a favoured few born 
'booted and spurred'. He had written in the Declaration of Inde-
pendence that we all must have the same opportunities, the same 
'unalienable' rights. And if the definition of 'all' was disgracefully 
incomplete in 1776, the spirit of the Declaration was generous 
enough that today 'all' is far more inclusive. 
399 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
Jefferson was a student of history - not just the compliant and 
safe history that praises our own time or country or ethnic group, 
but the real history of real humans, our weaknesses as well as our 
strengths. History taught him that the rich and powerful will steal 
and oppress if given half a chance. He described the governments 
of Europe, which he saw at first hand as the American ambassa-
dor to France. Under the pretence of government, he said, they 
had divided their nations into two classes: wolves and sheep. 
Jefferson taught that every government degenerates when it is left 
to the rulers alone, because rulers - by the very act of ruling -
misuse the public trust. The people themselves, he said, are the 
only prudent repository of power. 
But he worried that the people - and the argument goes back to 
Thucydides and Aristotle - are easily misled. So he advocated 
safeguards, insurance policies. One was the constitutional separa-
tion of powers; accordingly, various groups, some pursuing their 
own selfish interests, balance one another, preventing any one of 
them from running away with the country: the Executive, Legisla-
tive and Judicial Branches; the House and the Senate; the States 
and the Federal Government. He also stressed, passionately and 
repeatedly, that it was essential for the people to understand the 
risks and benefits of government, to educate themselves, and to 
involve themselves in the political process. Without that, he said, 
the wolves will take over. Here's how he put it in Notes on 
Virginia, stressing how the powerful and unscrupulous find zones 
of vulnerability they can exploit: 
In every government on earth is some trace of human 
weakness, some germ of corruption and degeneracy, which 
cunning will discover and wickedness insensibly open, culti-
vate and improve. Every government degenerates when 
trusted to the rulers of the people alone. The people them-
selves therefore are its only safe depositories. And to render 
even them safe, their minds must be improved . . . 
Jefferson had little to do with the actual writing of the US 
Constitution; as it was being formulated, he was serving as 
American minister to France. When he read its provisions, he was 
400 


Real Patriots Ask Questions 
pleased, but with two reservations. One deficiency: no limit was 
provided on the number of terms the President could serve. This, 
Jefferson feared, was a way for a President to become a king, in fact 
if not in law. The other major deficiency was the absence of a bill of 
rights. The citizen, the average person, was insufficiently protected, 
Jefferson thought, from the inevitable abuses of those in power. 
He advocated freedom of speech, in part so that even wildly 
unpopular views could be expressed, so that deviations from the 
conventional wisdom could be offered for consideration. Personally 
he was an extremely amiable man, reluctant to criticize even his 
sworn enemies. He displayed a bust of his arch-adversary Alexander 
Hamilton in the vestibule at Monticello. Nevertheless, he believed 
that the habit of scepticism is an essential prerequisite for responsible 
citizenship. He argued that the cost of education is trivial compared 
to the cost of ignorance, of leaving the government to the wolves. He 
taught that the country is safe only when the people rule. 
Part of the duty of citizenship is not to be intimidated into 
conformity. I wish that the oath of citizenship taken by recent 
immigrants, and the pledge that students routinely recite, 
included something like 'I promise to question everything my 
leaders tell me'. That would be really to Thomas Jefferson's point. 
'I promise to use my critical faculties. I promise to develop my 
independence of thought. I promise to educate myself so I can 
make my own judgements.' 
I also wish that the Pledge of Allegiance were directed at the 
Constitution and the Bill of Rights, as it is when the President 
takes his oath of office, rather than to the flag and the nation. 
When we consider the founders of our nation - Jefferson, 
Washington, Samuel and John Adams, Madison and Monroe, 
Benjamin Franklin, Tom Paine and many others - we have before 
us a list of at least ten and maybe even dozens of great political 
leaders. They were well educated. Products of the European 
Enlightenment, they were students of history. They knew human 
fallibility and weakness and corruptibility. They were fluent in the 
English language. They wrote their own speeches. They were 
realistic and practical, and at the same time motivated by high 
principles. They were not checking the pollsters on what to think 
this week. They knew what to think. They were comfortable with 
401 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
long-term thinking, planning even further ahead than the next 
election. They were self-sufficient, not requiring careers as politi-
cians or lobbyists to make a living. They were able to bring out the 
best in us. They were interested in and, at least two of them, 
fluent in science. They attempted to set a course for the United 
States into the far future - not so much by establishing laws as by 
setting limits on what kinds of laws could be passed. 
The Constitution and its Bill of Rights have done remarkably 
well, constituting, despite human weaknesses, a machine able, 
more often than not, to correct its own trajectory. 
At that time, there were only about two and a half million 
citizens of the United States. Today there are about a hundred 
times more. So if there were ten people of the calibre of Thomas 
Jefferson then, there ought to be 10 x 100 = 1,000 Thomas 
Jeffersons today. 
Where are they? 
One reason the Constitution is a daring and courageous document 
is that it allows for continuing change, even of the form of 
government itself, if the people so wish. Because no one is wise 
enough to foresee which ideas may answer urgent societal needs -
even if they're counterintuitive and have been troubling in the 
past - this document tries to guarantee the fullest and freest 
expression of views. 
There is, of course, a price. Most of us are for freedom of 
expression when there's a danger that our own views will be 
suppressed. We're not all that upset, though, when views we 
despise encounter a little censorship here and there. But within 
certain narrowly circumscribed limits - Justice Oliver Wendell 
Holmes's famous example was causing panic by falsely crying 'fire' 
in a crowded theatre - great liberties are permitted in America: 
• Gun collectors are free to use portraits of the Chief Justice, the 
Speaker of the House, or the Director of the FBI for target 
practice; outraged civic-minded citizens are free to burn in 
effigy the President of the United States. 
• Even if they mock Judaeo-Christian-Islamic values, even if they 
ridicule everything most of us hold dear, devil-worshippers (if 
402 


Real Patriots Ask Questions 
there are any) are entitled to practise their religion, so long as 
they break no constitutionally valid law. 
• A purported scientific article or popular book asserting the 
'superiority' of one race over another may not be censored by 
the government, no matter how pernicious it is; the cure for a 
fallacious argument is a better argument, not the suppression of 
ideas. 
• Individuals may, if they wish, praise the lives and politics of such 
undisputed mass murderers as Adolf Hitler, Josef Stalin and Mao 
Zedong. Even detestable opinions have a right to be heard. 
• Individuals or groups are free to argue that a Jewish or Masonic 
conspiracy is taking over the world, or that the Federal 
government is in league with the Devil. 
The system founded by Jefferson, Madison and their colleagues 
offers means of expression to those who do not understand its 
origins and wish to replace it by something very different. For 
example, Tom Clark, Attorney General and therefore chief law 
enforcement officer of the United States, in 1948 offered this 
suggestion: 'Those who do not believe in the ideology of the 
United States shall not be allowed to stay in the United States.' 
But if there is one key and characteristic US ideology, it is that 
there are no mandatory and no forbidden ideologies. Some more 
recent 1990s cases: John Brockhoeft, in jail for bombing an 
abortion clinic in Cincinnati, wrote, in a 'pro-life' newsletter: 
I'm a very narrow-minded, intolerant, reactionary, Bible-
thumping fundamentalist . . . a zealot and fanatic . . . The 
reason the United States was once a great nation, besides 
being blessed by God, is because she was founded on truth, 
justice, and narrow-mindedness. 
Randall Terry, founder of 'Operation Rescue', an organization that 
blockades abortion clinics, told a congregation in August 1993: 
Let a wave of intolerance wash over you . . . Yes, hate is 
good . . . Our goal is a Christian nation . . . We are called by 
God to conquer this country . . . We don't want pluralism. 
403 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
The expression of such views is protected, and properly so, under 
the Bill of Rights, even if those protected would abolish the Bill of 
Rights if they got the chance. The protection for the rest of us is to 
use that same Bill of Rights to get across to every citizen the 
indispensability of the Bill of Rights. 
What means to protect themselves against human fallibility, 
what error-protection machinery do these alternative doctrines 
and institutions offer? An infallible leader? Race? Nationalism? 
Wholesale disengagement from civilization, except for explosives 
and automatic weapons? How can they be sure - especially in the 
darkness of the twentieth century? Don't they need candles? 
In his celebrated little book, On Liberty, the English philoso-
pher John Stuart Mill argued that silencing an opinion is 'a 
peculiar evil'. If the opinion is right, we are robbed of the 
'opportunity of exchanging error for truth'; and if it's wrong, we 
are deprived of a deeper understanding of the truth in 'its collision 
with error'. If we know only our own side of the argument, we 
hardly know even that; it becomes stale, soon learned only by 
rote, untested, a pallid and lifeless truth. 
Mill also wrote, 'If society lets any considerable number of its 
members grow up as mere children, incapable of being acted on 
by rational consideration of distant motives, society has itself to 
blame.' Jefferson made the same point even more strongly: 'If a 
nation expects to be both ignorant and free in a state of civiliza-
tion, it expects what never was and never will be.' In a letter to 
Madison, he continued the thought: 'A society that will trade a 
little liberty for a little order will lose both, and deserve neither.' 
When permitted to listen to alternative opinions and engage in 
substantive debate, people have been known to change their 
minds. It can happen. For example, Hugo Black, in his youth, was 
a member of the Ku Klux Klan; he later became a Supreme Court 
justice and was one of the leaders in the historic Supreme Court 
decisions, partly based on the 14th Amendment to the Constitu-
tion, that affirmed the civil rights of all Americans: it was said that 
when he was a young man, he dressed up in white robes and 
scared black folks; when he got older, he dressed up in black robes 
and scared white folks. 
In matters of criminal justice, the Bill of Rights recognizes the 
404 


Real Patriots Ask Questions 
temptation that may be felt by police, prosecutors and the 
judiciary to intimidate witnesses and expedite punishment. The 
criminal-justice system is fallible: innocent people might be pun-
ished for crimes they did not commit; governments are perfectly 
capable of framing those who, for reasons unconnected with the 
purported crime, they do not like. So the Bill of Rights protects 
defendants. A kind of cost-benefit analysis is made. The guilty 
may on occasion be set free so that the innocent will not be 
punished. This is not only a moral virtue; it also inhibits the 
misuse of the criminal-justice system to suppress unpopular 
opinions or despised minorities. It is part of the error-correction 
machinery. 
New ideas, invention and creativity in general, always spearhead a 
kind of freedom, a breaking out from hobbling constraints. 
Freedom is a prerequisite for continuing the delicate experiment 
of science which is one reason the Soviet Union could not remain 
a totalitarian state and be technologically competitive. At the 
same time, science - or rather its delicate mix of openness and 
scepticism, and its encouragement of diversity and debate - is a 
prerequisite for continuing the delicate experiment of freedom in 
an industrial and highly technological society. 
Once you questioned the religious insistence on the prevailing 
view that the Earth was at the centre of the Universe, why should 
you accept the repeated and confident assertions by religious 
leaders that God sent kings to rule over us? In the seventeenth 
century, it was easy to whip English and Colonial juries into a 
frenzy over this impiety or that heresy. They were willing to 
torture people to death for their beliefs. By the late eighteenth 
century, they weren't so sure. 
Rossiter again (from Seedtime of the Republic, 1953): 
Under the pressure of the American environment, Christian-
ity grew more humanistic and temperate - more tolerant with 
the struggle of the sects, more liberal with the growth of 
optimism and rationalism, more experimental with the rise of 
science, more individualistic with the advent of democracy. 
Equally important, increasing numbers of colonists, as a 
405 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
legion of preachers loudly lamented, were turning secular in 
curiosity and skeptical in attitude. 
The Bill of Rights uncoupled religion from the state, in part 
because so many religions were steeped in an absolutist frame of 
mind, each convinced that it alone had a monopoly on the truth 
and therefore eager for the state to impose this truth on others. 
Often, the leaders and practitioners of absolutist religions were 
unable to perceive any middle ground or recognize that the truth 
might draw upon and embrace apparently contradictory doctrines. 
The framers of the Bill of Rights had before them the example 
of England, where the ecclesiastical crime of heresy and the 
secular crime of treason had become nearly indistinguishable. 
Many of the early colonists had come to America fleeing religious 
persecution, although some of them were perfectly happy to 
persecute other people for their beliefs. The founders of our 
nation recognized that a close relation between the government 
and any of the quarrelsome religions would be fatal to freedom -
and injurious to religion. Justice Black (in the Supreme Court 
decision Engel v. Vitale, 1962) described the Establishment Clause 
of the First Amendment this way: 
Its first and most immediate purpose rested on the belief that 
a union of government and religion tends to destroy govern-
ment and degrade religion. 
Moreover, here too the separation of powers works. Each sect 
and cult, as Walter Savage Landor once noted, is a moral check 
on the others: 'Competition is as wholesome in religion as in 
commerce.' But the price is high: This competition is an 
impediment to religious bodies acting in concert to address the 
common good. 
Rossiter concludes: 
the twin doctrines of separation of church and state and 
liberty of individual conscience are the marrow of our democ-
racy, if not indeed America's most magnificent contribution 
to the freeing of Western man. 
406 


Real Patriots Ask Questions 
Now it's no good to have such rights if they're not used - a right of 
free speech when no one contradicts the government, freedom of 
the press when no one is willing to ask the tough questions, a right 
of assembly when there are no protests, universal suffrage when 
less than half the electorate votes, separation of church and state 
when the wall of separation is not regularly repaired. Through 
disuse they can become no more than votive objects, patriotic 
lip-service. Rights and freedoms: use 'em or lose 'em. 
Due to the foresight of the framers of the Bill of Rights - and 
even more so to all those who, at considerable personal risk, 
insisted on exercising those rights - it's hard now to bottle up free 
speech. School library committees, the immigration service, the 
police, the FBI or the ambitious politician looking to score cheap 
votes, may attempt it from time to time, but sooner or later the 
cork pops. The Constitution is, after all, the law of the land, 
public officials are sworn to uphold it, and activists and the courts 
episodically hold their feet to the fire. 
However, through lowered educational standards, declining 
intellectual competence, diminished zest for substantive debate, 
and social sanctions against scepticism, our liberties can be slowly 
eroded and our rights subverted. The founders understood this 
well: 'The time for fixing every essential right on a legal basis is 
while our rulers are honest, and ourselves united,' said Thomas 
Jefferson. 
From the conclusion of this [Revolutionary] war we shall be 
going downhill. It will not then be necessary to resort every 
moment to the people for support. They will be forgotten, 
therefore, and their rights disregarded. They will forget 
themselves but in the sole faculty of making money, and will 
never think of uniting to effect a due respect for their rights. 
The shackles, therefore, which shall not be knocked off at the 
conclusion of this war will remain on us long, will be made 
heavier and heavier, 'til our rights shall revive or expire in a 
convulsion. 
Education on the value of free speech and the other freedoms 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
reserved by the Bill of Rights, about what happens when you 
don't have them, and about how to exercise and protect them, 
should be an essential prerequisite for being an American citizen -
or the citizen of any nation, the more so to the degree that such 
rights remain unprotected. If we can't think for ourselves, if we're 
unwilling to question authority, then we're just putty in the hands 
of those in power. But if the citizens are educated and form their 
own opinions, then those in power work for us. In every country, 
we should be teaching our children the scientific method and the 
reasons for a Bill of Rights. With it comes a certain decency, 
humility and community spirit. In the demon-haunted world that 
we inhabit by virtue of being human, this may be all that stands 
between us and the enveloping darkness. 
408 


Acknowledgements 
I
t has been my great pleasure over many years to teach a Senior 
Seminar on Critical Thinking at Cornell University. I've been 
able to select students from all over the University on the basis 
both of ability, and of cultural and disciplinary diversity. We stress 
written assignments and oral argumentation. Towards the end of 
the course, students select a range of wildly controversial social 
issues in which they have major emotional investments. Paired 
two-by-two they prepare for a succession of end-of-semester oral 
debates. A few weeks before the debates, however, they are 
informed that it is the task of each to present the point of view of 
the opponent in a way that's satisfactory to the opponent - so the 
opponent will say, 'Yes, that's a fair presentation of my views.' In 
the joint written debate they explore their differences, but also 
how the debate process has helped them better to understand the 
opposing point of view. Some of the topics in this book were first 
presented to these students; I have learned much from their 
reception and criticism of my ideas, and want to thank them here. 
I'm also grateful to Cornell's Department of Astronomy, and its 
Chair, Yervant Terzian, for permitting me to teach the course, 
which, although labelled Astronomy 490, presents only a little 
astronomy. 
Some of this book has also been presented in Parade magazine, 
a supplement to Sunday newspapers all over North America, with 
some 83 million readers each week. The vigorous feedback I've 
409 
