THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
'apporting', accounts of such experiences might gain approval, 
even prestige. In the former, I would be sorely tempted to 
suppress the thing altogether; in the latter, maybe even to 
exaggerate or elaborate just a little to make it even more 
miraculous than it seemed. 
Charles Dickens, who lived in a flourishing rational culture in 
which, however, spiritualism was also thriving, described the 
dilemma in these words (from his short story, 'To Be Taken with a 
Grain of Salt'): 
I have always noticed a prevalent want of courage, even 
among persons of superior intelligence and culture, as to 
imparting their own psychological experiences when those 
have been of a strange sort. Almost all men are afraid that 
what they could relate in such wise would find no parallel or 
response in a listener's internal life, and might be suspected 
or laughed at. A truthful traveller who should have seen some 
extraordinary creature in the likeness of a sea-serpent, would 
have no fear of mentioning it; but the same traveller having 
had some singular presentiment, impulse, vagary of thought, 
vision (so-called), dream, or other remarkable mental 
impression, would hesitate considerably before he would own 
to it. To his reticence I attribute much of the obscurity in 
which such subjects are involved. 
In our time, there is still much dismissive chortling and ridicule. 
But the reticence and obscurity is more readily overcome, for 
example, in a 'supportive' setting provided by a therapist or 
hypnotist. Unfortunately - and, for some people, unbelievably -
the distinction between imagination and memory is often blurred. 
Some 'abductees' say they remember the experience without 
hypnosis; many do not. But hypnosis is an unreliable way to 
refresh memory. It often elicits imagination, fantasy and play as 
well as true recollections, with neither patient nor therapist able to 
distinguish the one from the other. Hypnosis seems to involve, in 
a central way, a state of heightened suggestibility. Courts have 
banned its use as evidence or even as a tool of criminal investiga-
tion. The American Medical Association calls memories surfacing 
130 


On the Distinction between True and False Visions 
under hypnosis less reliable than those recalled without it. A 
standard medical school text (Harold I. Kaplan, Comprehensive 
Textbook of Psychiatry, 1989) warns of 'a high likelihood that the 
beliefs of the hypnotist will be communicated to the patient and 
incorporated into what the patient believes to be memories, often 
with strong conviction'. So the fact that, when hypnotized, people 
sometimes relate alien abduction stories carries little weight. 
There's a danger that subjects are - at least on some matters - so 
eager to please the hypnotist that they sometimes respond to 
subtle cues of which even the hypnotist is unaware. 
In a study by Alvin Lawson of California State University, Long 
Beach, eight subjects, pre-screened to eliminate UFO buffs, were 
hypnotized by a physician and informed that they had been 
abducted, brought to a spaceship and examined. With no further 
prompting, they were asked to describe the experience. Their 
accounts, most of which were easily elicited, were almost indistin-
guishable from the accounts that self-described abductees present. 
True, Lawson had cued his subjects briefly and directly; but in 
many cases the therapists who routinely deal with alien abductions 
cue their subjects, some in great detail, others more subtly and 
indirectly. 
The psychiatrist George Ganaway (as related by Lawrence 
Wright) once proposed to a highly suggestible patient under 
hypnosis that five hours were missing from her memory of a 
certain day. When he mentioned a bright light overhead, she 
promptly told him about UFOs and aliens. When he insisted she 
had been experimented on, a detailed abduction story emerged. 
But when she came out of the trance, and examined a video of the 
session, she recognized that something like a dream had been 
caught surfacing. Over the next year, though, she repeatedly 
flashed back to the dream material. 
The University of Washington psychologist Elizabeth Loftus 
has found that unhypnotized subjects can easily be made to 
believe they saw something they didn't. In a typical experiment, 
subjects will view a film of a car accident. In the course of being 
questioned about what they saw, they're casually given false 
information. For example, a stop sign is off-handedly referred to, 
although there wasn't one in the film. Many subjects then dutifully 
131 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
recall seeing a stop sign. When the deception is revealed, some 
vehemently protest, stressing how vividly they remember the sign. 
The greater the time lag between viewing the film and being given 
the false information, the more people allow their memories to be 
tampered with. Loftus argues that 'memories of an event more 
closely resemble a story undergoing constant revision than a 
packet of pristine information'. 
There are many other examples, some - a spurious memory of 
being lost as a child in a shopping mall, for instance - of greater 
emotional impact. Once the key idea is suggested, the patient 
often plausibly fleshes out the supporting details. Lucid but wholly 
false recollections can easily be induced by a few cues and 
questions, especially in the therapeutic setting. Memory can be 
contaminated. False memories can be implanted even in minds 
that do not consider themselves vulnerable and uncritical. 
Stephen Ceci of Cornell University, Loftus and their colleagues 
have found, unsurprisingly, that preschoolers are exceptionally 
vulnerable to suggestion. The child who, when first asked, cor-
rectly denies having caught his hand in a mousetrap later remem-
bers the event in vivid, self-generated detail. When more directly 
told about 'some things that happened to you when you were 
little', over time they easily enough assent to the implanted 
memories. Professionals watching videotapes of the children can 
do no better than chance in distinguishing false memories from 
true ones. Is there any reason to think that adults are wholly 
immune to the fallibilities exhibited by children? 
President Ronald Reagan, who spent World War Two in 
Hollywood, vividly described his own role in liberating Nazi 
concentration camp victims. Living in the film world, he 
apparently confused a movie he had seen with a reality he had 
not. On many occasions in his Presidential campaigns, Mr 
Reagan told an epic story of World War Two courage and 
sacrifice, an inspiration for all of us. Only it never happened; it 
was the plot of the movie A Wing and a Prayer - that made 
quite an impression on me, too, when I saw it at age 9. Many 
other instances of this sort can be found in Reagan's public 
statements. It is not hard to imagine serious public dangers 
emerging out of instances in which political, military, scientific 


On the Distinction between True and False Visions 
or religious leaders are unable to distinguish fact from vivid 
fiction. 
In preparing for courtroom testimony, witnesses are coached by 
their lawyers. Often, they are made to repeat the story over and 
over again, until they get it 'right'. Then, on the stand what they 
remember is the story they've been telling in the lawyer's office. 
The nuances have been shaded. Or it may no longer correspond, 
even in its major features, to what really happened. Conveniently, 
the witnesses may have forgotten that their memories were 
reprocessed. 
These facts are relevant in evaluating the societal effects of 
advertising and of national propaganda. But here they suggest 
that on alien abduction matters - where interviews typically take 
place years after the alleged event - therapists must be very 
careful that they do not accidentally implant or select the stories 
they elicit. 
Perhaps what we actually remember is a set of memory frag-
ments stitched on to a fabric of our own devising. If we sew 
cleverly enough, we have made ourselves a memorable story easy 
to recall. Fragments by themselves, unencumbered by association, 
are harder to retrieve. The situation is rather like the method of 
science itself where many isolated data points can be remem-
bered, summarized and explained in the framework of a theory. 
We then much more easily recall the theory and not the data. 
In science the theories are always being reassessed and con-
fronted with new facts; if the facts are seriously discordant -
beyond the error bars - the theory may have to be revised. But in 
everyday life it is very rare that we are confronted with new facts 
about events of long ago. Our memories are almost never 
challenged. They can, instead, be frozen in place, no matter how 
flawed they are, or become a work in continual artistic revision. 
More than gods and demons, the best-attested apparitions are 
those of saints, especially the Virgin Mary in Western Europe 
from late medieval to modern times. While alien abduction stories 
have much more the flavour of profane, demonic apparitions, 
insight into the UFO myth can also be gained from visions 
described as sacred. Perhaps best known are those of Jeanne 
133 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
d'Arc in France, St Bridget in Sweden, and Girolamo Savonarola 
in Italy. But more appropriate for our purpose are the apparitions 
seen by shepherds and peasants and children. In a world plagued 
by uncertainty and horror, these people longed for contact with 
the divine. A detailed record of such events in Castile and 
Catalonia is provided by William A. Christian Jr in his book 
Apparitions in Late Medieval and Renaissance Spain (1981). 
In a typical case, a rural woman or child reports encountering 
a girl or an oddly tiny woman - perhaps three or four feet tall -
who reveals herself to be the Virgin Mary, the Mother of God. 
She requests the awestruck witness to go to the village fathers 
or the local Church authorities and order them to say prayers 
for the dead, or obey the Commandments, or build a shrine at 
this very spot in the countryside. If they do not comply, dire 
penalties are threatened, perhaps the plague. Alternatively, in 
plague-infested times, Mary promises to cure the disease but 
only if her request is satisfied. 
The witness tries to do as she is told. But when she informs her 
father or husband or priest, she is ordered to repeat the story to no 
one; it is mere female foolishness or frivolity or demonic halluci-
nation. So she keeps quiet. Days later she is confronted again by 
Mary, a little put out that her request has not been honoured. 
'They will not believe me,' the witness complains. 'Give me a 
sign.' Evidence is needed. 
So Mary - who seems to have had no foreknowledge that 
evidence would have to be provided - provides a sign. The 
villagers and priests are promptly convinced. The shrine is built. 
Miraculous cures occur in its vicinity. Pilgrims come from far and 
wide. Priests are busy. The economy of the region booms. The 
original witness is appointed keeper of the sacred shrine. 
In most of the cases we know of, there was a commission of 
inquiry, comprising leaders civic and ecclesiastic, who attested to 
the genuineness of the apparition, despite initial, almost exclu-
sively male, scepticism. But the standards of evidence were not 
generally high. In one case the testimony of a delirious eight-year-
old boy, taken two days before his death from plague, was soberly 
accepted. Some of these commissions deliberated decades or even 
a century after the event. 
134 


On the Distinction between True and False Visions 
In On the Distinction between True and False Visions, an expert 
on the subject, Jean Gerson, in around 1400, summarized the 
criteria for recognizing a credible witness of an apparition: one 
was the willingness to accept advice from the political and 
religious hierarchy. Thus anyone seeing a vision disturbing to 
those in power was ipso facto an unreliable witness, and saints and 
virgins could be made to say whatever the authorities wanted to 
hear. 
The 'signs' allegedly provided by Mary, the evidence offered 
and considered compelling, included an ordinary candle, a piece 
of silk, and a magnetic stone; a piece of coloured tile; footprints; 
the witness's unusually quick gathering of thistles; a simple 
wooden cross inserted in the ground; welts and wounds on the 
witness; and a variety of contortions - a 12-year-old with her hand 
held funny, or legs folded back, or a closed mouth making her 
temporarily mute - that are 'cured' the moment her story is 
accepted. 
In some cases accounts may have been compared and coordi-
nated before testimony was given. For example, multiple wit-
nesses in a small town might tell of a tall, glowing woman dressed 
all in white carrying an infant son and surrounded by a radiance 
that lit up the street the previous night. But in other cases, people 
standing directly beside the witness could see nothing, as in this 
report of a 1617 apparition from Castile: 
'Aye, Bartolome, the lady who came to me these past days is 
coming through the meadow, and she is kneeling and embrac-
ing the cross there - look at her, look at her!' The youth 
though he looked as hard as he could saw nothing except 
some small birds flying around above the cross. 
Possible motives for inventing and accepting such stories are 
not hard to find: jobs for priests, notaries, carpenters and 
merchants, and other boosts to the original economy in a time 
of depression; augmented social status of the witness and her 
family; prayers once again offered for relatives buried in 
graveyards later abandoned because of plague, drought and 
war; rousing public spirit against enemies, especially Moors; 
135 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
improving civility and obedience to canon law; and confirming 
the faith of the pious. The fervour of pilgrims in such shrines 
was impressive; it was not uncommon for rock scrapings or dirt 
from the shrine to be mixed with water and drunk as medicine. 
But I'm not suggesting that most witnesses made the whole 
business up. Something else was going on. 
Almost all the urgent requests by Mary were remarkable for 
their prosaicness - for example, in this 1483 apparition from 
Catalonia: 
I charge you by your soul to charge the souls of the men of the 
parishes of El Torn, Milleras, El Salent, and Sant Miquel de 
Campmaior to charge the souls of the priests to ask the 
people to pay up the tithes and all the duties of the church 
and restore other things that they hold covertly or openly 
which are not theirs to their rightful owners within thirty 
days, for it will be necessary, and observe well the holy 
Sunday. 
And second that they should cease and desist from blas-
pheming and they should pay the usual charitas mandated by 
their dead ancestors. 
Often the apparition is seen just after the witness awakes. 
Francisca la Brava testified in 1523 that she had gotten out of bed 
'without knowing if she was in control of her senses', although in 
later testimony she claimed to be fully awake. (This was in 
response to a question which allowed a gradation of possibilities: 
fully awake, dozing, in a trance, asleep.) Sometimes details are 
wholly missing, such as what the accompanying angels looked 
like; or Mary is described as both tall and short, both mother and 
child, characteristics that unmistakably suggest themselves as 
dream material. In the Dialogue on Miracles written around 1223 
by Caesarius of Heisterbach, clerical visions of the Virgin Mary 
often occurred during matins, which took place at the sleepy 
midnight hour. 
It is natural to suspect that many, perhaps all, of these 
apparitions were a species of dream, waking or sleeping, com-
pounded by hoaxes (and by forgeries; there was a thriving 
136 


On the Distinction between True and False Visions 
business in contrived miracles: religious paintings and statues dug 
up by accident or divine command). The matter was addressed in 
the Siete Partidas, the codex of canon and civil law compiled under 
the direction of Alfonso the Wise, king of Castile, around 1248. In 
it we can read the following: 
Some men fraudulently discover or build altars in fields or in 
towns, saying that there are relics of certain saints in those 
places and pretending that they perform miracles, and, for 
this reason, people from many places are induced to go there 
as on a pilgrimage, in order to take something away from 
them; and there are others who influenced by dreams or 
empty phantoms which appear to them, erect altars and 
pretend to discover them in the above named localities. 
In listing the reasons for erroneous beliefs, Alfonso lays out a 
continuum from sect, opinion, fantasy and dream to hallucination. 
A kind of fantasy named antoianca is defined as follows: 
Antoianca is something that stops before the eyes and then 
disappears, as one sees or hears it in a trance, and so is 
without substance. 
A 1517 papal bull distinguishes between apparitions that appear 
'in dreams or divinely'. Clearly, the secular and ecclesiastical 
authorities, even in times of extreme credulity, were alert to the 
possibilities of hoax and delusion. 
Nevertheless, in most of medieval Europe, such apparitions 
were greeted warmly by the Roman Catholic clergy, especially 
because the Marian admonitions were so congenial to the 
priesthood. A pathetic few 'signs' of evidence - a stone or a 
footprint and never anything unfakeable - sufficed. But begin-
ning in the fifteenth century, around the time of the Protestant 
Reformation, the attitude of the Church changed. Those who 
reported an independent channel to Heaven were outflanking 
the Church's chain of command up to God. Moreover, a few of 
the apparitions - Jeanne d'Arc's, for example - had awkward 
political or moral implications. The perils represented by 
137 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
Jeanne d'Arc's visions were described by her inquisitors in 1431 
in these words: 
The great danger was shown to her that comes of someone so 
presumptuous to believe they have such apparitions and 
revelations, and therefore lie about matters concerning God, 
giving out false prophecies and divinations not known from 
God, but invented. From which could follow the seduction of 
peoples, the inception of new sects, and many other impieties 
that subvert the Church and Catholics. 
Both Jeanne d'Arc and Girolamo Savonarola were burned at the 
stake for their visions. 
In 1516 the Fifth Lateran Council reserved to 'the Apostolic 
seat' the right to examine the authenticity of apparitions. For poor 
peasants whose visions had no political content, the punishments 
fell short of the ultimate severity. The Marian apparition seen by 
Francisca la Brava, a young mother, was described by Licenciado 
Mariana, the Lord Inquisitor, as 'to the detriment of our holy 
Catholic faith and the diminution of its authority'. Her apparition 
'was all vanity and frivolity'. 'By rights we could have treated her 
more rigorously', the Inquisitor continued. 
But in deference to certain just reasons that move us to 
mitigate the rigour of the sentences we decree as a punish-
ment to Francisca la Brava and an example to others not to 
attempt similar things that we condemn her to be put on an 
ass and given one hundred lashes in public through the 
accustomed streets of Belmonte naked from the waist up, and 
the same number in the town of El Quintanar in the same 
manner. And that from now on she not say or affirm in public 
or secretly by word or insinuation the things she said in her 
confessions or else she will be prosecuted as an impenitent 
and one who does not believe in or agree with what is in our 
holy Catholic faith. 
Despite the penalties, it is striking how often the witness stuck to 
her guns and, ignoring the encouragements offered her to confess 
138 


On the Distinction between True and False Visions 
that she was lying or dreaming or confused, insisted that she really 
and truly had seen the vision. 
In a time when nearly everyone was illiterate, before news-
papers, radio and television, how could the religious and icono-
graphic detail of these apparitions have been so similar? William 
Christian believes there is a ready answer in cathedral dramaturgy 
(especially Christmas plays), in itinerant preachers and pilgrims, 
and in church sermons. Legends about nearby shrines spread 
quickly. People sometimes came from a hundred miles or more so 
that, say, their sick child could be cured by a pebble that had been 
trodden on by the Mother of God. Legends influenced apparitions 
and vice versa. In a time haunted by drought, plague and war, 
with no social or medical services available to the average person, 
with public literacy and the scientific method unheard of, sceptical 
thinking was rare. 
Why are the admonitions so prosaic? Why is a vision of so 
illustrious a personage as the Mother of God necessary so, in a 
tiny county populated by a few thousand souls, a shrine will be 
repaired or the populace will refrain from cursing? Why not 
important and prophetic messages whose significance could be 
recognized in later years as something that could have emanated 
only from God or the saints? Wouldn't this have greatly enhanced 
the Catholic cause in its mortal struggle with Protestantism and 
the Enlightenment? But we have no apparitions cautioning the 
Church against, say, accepting the delusion of an Earth-centred 
Universe, or warning it of complicity with Nazi Germany - two 
matters of considerable moral as well as historical import, on 
which Pope John Paul II, to his credit, has admitted that the 
Church has erred. 
Not a single saint criticized the practice of torturing and 
burning 'witches' and heretics. Why not? Were they unaware of 
what was going on? Could they not grasp its evil? And why is 
Mary always ordering the poor peasant to inform the authori-
ties? Why doesn't she admonish the authorities herself? Or the 
King? Or the Pope? In the nineteenth and twentieth centuries, 
it is true, some of the apparitions have taken on greater import 
- at Fatima, Portugal, in 1917, where the Virgin was incensed 
that a secular government had replaced a government run by 
139 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
the Church, and at Garabandal, Spain, in 1961-5, where the 
end of the world was threatened unless conservative political 
and religious doctrines were adopted forthwith. 
I think I can see many parallels between Marian apparitions and 
alien abductions, even though the witnesses in the former cases 
are not promptly taken to Heaven and don't have their reproduc-
tive organs meddled with. The beings reported are diminutive, 
most often about two-and-a-half to four feet high. They come 
from the sky. The content of the communication is, despite its 
purported celestial origin, mundane. There seems to be a clear 
connection with sleep and dreams. The witnesses, often females, 
are troubled about speaking out, especially after encountering 
ridicule from males in positions of authority. Nevertheless they 
persist: they really saw such a thing, they insist. Means of 
conveying the stories exist; they are eagerly discussed, permitting 
details to be coordinated even among witnesses who have never 
met one another. Others present at the time and place of the 
apparition see nothing unusual. The purported 'signs' or evidence 
are, without exception, nothing that humans couldn't acquire or 
fabricate on their own. Indeed, Mary seems unsympathetic to the 
need for evidence, and occasionally is willing to cure only those 
who had believed the account of her apparition before she 
supplied 'signs'. And while there are no therapists, per se, the 
society is suffused by a network of influential parish priests and 
their hierarchical superiors who have a vested interest in the 
reality of the visions. 
In our time, there are still apparitions of Mary and other angels, 
but also, as summarized by G. Scott Sparrow, a psychotherapist 
and hypnotist, of Jesus. In I Am With You Always: True Stories of 
Encounters with Jesus (Bantam, 1995), first-hand accounts, some 
moving, some banal, of such encounters are laid out. Oddly, most 
of them are straightforward dreams, acknowledged as such, and 
the ones called visions are said to differ from dreams 'only because 
we experience them while we are awake'. But, for Sparrow, 
judging something 'only a dream' does not compromise its exter-
nal reality. For Sparrow, any being you dream of, and any 
incident, really exists in the world outside your head. He specifi-
cally denies that dreams are 'purely subjective'. Evidence doesn't 
140 


On the Distinction between True and False Visions 
enter into it. If you dreamed it, if it felt good, if it elicited wonder, 
why then it really happened. There's not a sceptical bone in 
Sparrow's body. When Jesus tells a troubled woman in an 
'intolerable' marriage to throw the bum out, Sparrow admits that 
this poses problems for 'advocates of a scripturally consistent 
position'. In that case, '[u]ltimately, perhaps, one could say that 
virtually all presumed guidance is generated from within'. What if 
someone reported a dream in which Jesus counselled, say, abor-
tion - or vengeance? And if indeed somewhere, somehow we 
must eventually draw the line and conclude that some dreams are 
invented by the dreamer, why not all? 
Why would people invent abduction stories? Why, for that 
matter, would people appear on TV audience participation pro-
grammes devoted to sexual humiliation of the 'guests' - the 
current rage in America's video wasteland? Discovering that 
you're an alien abductee is at least a break from the routine of 
everyday life. You gain the attention of peers, therapists, maybe 
even the media. There is a sense of discovery, exhilaration, awe. 
What will you remember next? You begin to believe that you may 
be the harbinger or even the instrument of momentous events now 
rolling towards us. And you don't want to disappoint your 
therapist. You crave his or her approval. I think there can very 
well be psychic rewards in becoming an abductee. 
For comparison, consider product tampering cases, which con-
vey very little of the sense of wonder that surrounds UFOs and 
alien abductions: someone claims to find a hypodermic syringe in 
a popular soft drink can. Understandably, this is upsetting. It's 
reported in newspapers and especially on television news. Soon 
there's a spate, a virtual epidemic of similar reports from all over 
the country. But it's very hard to see how a hypodermic syringe 
could get into a can at the factory, and in none of the cases are 
witnesses present when an intact can is opened and a syringe 
discovered inside. 
Slowly the evidence accumulates that this is a 'copycat' crime. 
People have only been pretending to find syringes in soft drink 
cans. Why would anyone do it? What possible motives could they 
have? Some psychiatrists say that the primary motives are greed 
141 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
(they'll sue the manufacturer for damages), a craving for atten-
tion, and a wish to be portrayed as a victim. Note there are no 
therapists touting the reality of needles in cans and urging their 
patients, subtly or directly, to go public with the news. Also, 
serious penalties are levied for product tampering, and even for 
falsely alleging that products have been tampered with. In con-
trast, there are therapists who encourage abductees to tell their 
stories to mass audiences, and no legal penalties are exacted for 
falsely claiming you've been abducted by a UFO. Whatever your 
reason for going down this road, how much more satisfying it must 
be to convince others that you've been chosen by higher beings for 
their own enigmatic purpose than that by mere happenstance 
you've found a hypodermic syringe in your cola. 
142 


9 
Therapy 
It is a capital mistake to theorize before one has data. 
Insensibly one begins to twist facts to suit theories, instead 
of theories to suit facts. 
Sherlock Holmes, 
in Arthur Conan Doyle's 
A Scandal in Bohemia (1891) 
True memories seemed like phantoms, while false memories 
were so convincing that they replaced reality. 
Gabriel Garcia Marquez, 
Strange Pilgrims (1992) 
J
ohn Mack is a Harvard University psychiatrist whom I've 
known for many years. 'Is there anything to this UFO busi-
ness?' he asked me long ago. 'Not much,' I replied. 'Except of 
course on the psychiatric side.' 
He looked into it, interviewed abductees, and was converted. 
He now accepts the accounts of abductees at face value. Why? 
'I wasn't looking for this,' he says. 'There's nothing in my 
background that prepared me' for the alien abduction story. 'It's 
completely persuasive because of the emotional power of these 
experiences.' In his book, Abductions, Mack explicitly proposes 
the very dangerous doctrine that 'the power or intensity with 
which something is felt' is a guide to whether it's true. 
143 
