The Demon-Haunted World 
God has no contact with man,' she continues; 'only through the 
demonic is there intercourse and conversation between man and 
gods, whether in the waking state or during sleep.' 
Plato, Socrates' most celebrated student, assigned a high role to 
demons: 'No human nature invested with supreme power is able 
to order human affairs,' he said, 'and not overflow with insolence 
and wrong . . .' 
We do not appoint oxen to be the lords of oxen, or goats of 
goats, but we ourselves are a superior race and rule over them. 
In like manner God, in his love of mankind, placed over us the 
demons, who are a superior race, and they with great ease and 
pleasure to themselves, and no less to us, taking care of us and 
giving us peace and reverence and order and justice never 
failing, made the tribes of men happy and united. 
He stoutly denied that demons were a source of evil, and 
represented Eros, the keeper of sexual passions, as a demon, not a 
god, 'neither mortal nor immortal', 'neither good nor bad'. But all 
later Platonists, including the Neo-Platonists who powerfully 
influenced Christian philosophy, held that some demons were 
good and others evil. The pendulum was swinging. Aristotle, 
Plato's famous student, seriously considered the contention that 
dreams are scripted by demons. Plutarch and Porphyry proposed 
that the demons, who filled the upper air, came from the Moon. 
The early Church Fathers, despite having imbibed Neo-
Platonism from the culture they swam in, were anxious to separate 
themselves from 'pagan' belief systems. They taught that all of 
pagan religion consisted of the worship of demons and men, both 
misconstrued as gods. When St Paul complained (Ephesians vi, 
12) about wickedness in high places, he was referring not to 
government corruption, but to demons, who lived in high places: 
For we wrestle not against flesh and blood, but against 
principalities, against powers, against the rulers of the dark-
ness of this world, against spiritual wickedness in high places. 
From the beginning, much more was intended than demons as a 
109 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
mere poetic metaphor for the evil in the hearts of men. 
St Augustine was much vexed with demons. He quotes the 
pagan thinking prevalent in his time: 'The gods occupy the loftiest 
regions, men the lowest, the demons the middle region . . . They 
have immortality of body, but passions of the mind in common 
with men.' In Book VIII of The City of God (begun in 413), 
Augustine assimilates this ancient tradition, replaces gods by 
God, and demonizes the demons, arguing that they are, without 
exception, malign. They have no redeeming virtues. They are the 
fount of all spiritual and material evil. He calls them 'aerial 
animals . . . most eager to inflict harm, utterly alien from right-
eousness, swollen with pride, pale with envy, subtle in deceit.' 
They may profess to carry messages between God and man, 
disguising themselves as angels of the Lord, but this pose is a snare 
to lure us to our destruction. They can assume any form, and 
know many things - 'demon' means 'knowledge' in Greek* -
especially about the material world. However intelligent, they are 
deficient in charity. They prey on 'the captive and outwitted minds 
of men,' wrote Tertullian. 'They have their abode in the air, the 
stars are their neighbours, their commerce is with the clouds.' 
In the eleventh century, the influential Byzantine theologian, 
philosopher and shady politician, Michael Psellus, described 
demons in these words: 
These animals exist in our own life, which is full of passions, for 
they are present abundantly in the passions, and their dwelling-
place is that of matter, as is their rank and degree. For this 
reason they are also subject to passions and fettered to them. 
One Richalmus, abbot of Schonthal, around 1270 penned an 
entire treatise on demons, rich in first-hand experience: he sees 
(but only when his eyes are shut) countless malevolent demons, 
like motes of dust, buzzing around his head - and everyone else's. 
Despite successive waves of rationalist, Persian, Jewish, Christian 
and Muslim world views, despite revolutionary social, political 
* 'Science' means 'knowledge' in Latin. A jurisdictional dispute is exposed, even 
if we look no further. 
110 


The Demon-Haunted World 
and philosophical ferment, the existence, much of the character, 
and even the name of demons remained unchanged from Hesiod 
to the Crusades. 
Demons, the 'powers of the air', come down from the skies and 
have unlawful sexual congress with women. Augustine believed 
that witches were the offspring of these forbidden unions. In the 
Middle Ages, as in classical antiquity, nearly everyone believed 
such stories. The demons were also called devils, or fallen angels. 
The demonic seducers of women were labelled incubi; of men, 
succubi. There are cases in which nuns reported, in some befud-
dlement, a striking resemblance between the incubus and the 
priest-confessor, or the bishop, and awoke the next morning, as 
one fifteenth-century chronicler put it, to 'find themselves pol-
luted just as if they had commingled with a man'. There are 
similar accounts, but in harems not convents, in ancient China. So 
many women reported incubi, argued the Presbyterian religious 
writer Richard Baxter (in his Certainty of the World of Spirits, 
1691), 'that 'tis impudence to deny it'.* 
As they seduced, the incubi and succubi were perceived as a 
weight bearing down on the chest of the dreamer. Mare, despite 
its Latin meaning, is the Old English word for incubus, and 
nightmare meant originally the demon that sits on the chests of 
sleepers, tormenting them with dreams. In Athanasius' Life of St 
Anthony (written around 360) demons are described as coming 
and going at will in locked rooms; 1400 years later, in his work De 
Daemonialitae, the Franciscan scholar Ludovico Sinistrari assures 
us that demons pass through walls. 
The external reality of demons was almost entirely unques-
tioned from antiquity through late medieval times. Maimonides 
denied their reality, but the overwhelming majority of rabbis 
believed in dybbuks. One of the few cases I can find where it is 
even hinted that demons might be internal, generated in our 
* Likewise, in the same work, 'The raising of storms by witches is attested by so 
many, that I think it needless to recite them.' The theologian Meric Casaubon 
argued - in his 1668 book. Of Credulity and Incredulity, that witches must exist 
because, after all, everyone believes in them. Anything that a large number of 
people believe must be true. 
111 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
minds, is when Abba Poemen - one of the desert fathers of the 
early Church - was asked, 
'How do the demons fight against me?' 
'The demons fight against you?' Father Poemen asked in turn. 
'Our own wills become the demons, and it is these which attack us.' 
The medieval attitudes on incubi and succubi were influenced 
by Macrobius' fourth-century Commentary on the Dream of 
Scipio, which went through dozens of editions before the Euro-
pean Enlightenment. Macrobius described phantoms (phantasma) 
seen 'in the moment between wakefulness and slumber'. The 
dreamer 'imagines' the phantoms as predatory. Macrobius had a 
sceptical side which his medieval readers tended to ignore. 
Obsession with demons began to reach a crescendo when, in his 
famous Bull of 1484, Pope Innocent VIII declared, 
It has come to Our ears that members of both sexes do not 
avoid to have intercourse with evil angels, incubi, and 
succubi, and that by their sorceries, and by their incantations, 
charms, and conjurations, they suffocate, extinguish, and 
cause to perish the births of women 
as well as generate numerous other calamities. With this Bull, 
Innocent initiated the systematic accusation, torture and execu-
tion of countless 'witches' all over Europe. They were guilty of 
what Augustine had described as 'a criminal tampering with the 
unseen world'. Despite the evenhanded 'members of both sexes' 
in the language of the Bull, unsurprisingly it was mainly girls and 
women who were so persecuted. 
Many leading Protestants of the following centuries, their differ-
ences with the Catholic Church notwithstanding, adopted nearly 
identical views. Even humanists such as Desiderius Erasmus and 
Thomas More believed in witches. 'The giving up of witchcraft,' said 
John Wesley, the founder of Methodism, 'is in effect the giving up of 
the Bible.' William Blackstone, the celebrated jurist, in his Com-
mentaries on the Laws of England (1765), asserted: 
To deny the possibility, nay, actual existence of witchcraft 
and sorcery is at once flatly to contradict the revealed word 
112 


The Demon-Haunted World 
of God in various passages of both the Old and New 
Testament. 
Innocent commended 'Our dear sons Henry Kramer and James 
Sprenger' who 'have been by Letters Apostolic delegated as 
Inquisitors of these heretical [de]pravities'. If 'the abominations 
and enormities in question remain unpunished,' the souls of 
multitudes face eternal damnation. 
The Pope appointed Kramer and Sprenger to write a compre-
hensive analysis, using the full academic armoury of the late 
fifteenth century. With exhaustive citations of scripture and of 
ancient and modern scholars, they produced the Malleus Malefi-
carum, the 'Hammer of Witches', aptly described as one of the 
most terrifying documents in human history. Thomas Ady, in A 
Candle in the Dark, condemned it as 'villainous Doctrines & 
Inventions', 'horrible lyes and impossibilities', serving to hide 
'their unparalleled cruelty from the ears of the world'. What the 
Malleus comes down to, pretty much, is that if you're accused of 
witchcraft, you're a witch. Torture is an unfailing means to 
demonstrate the validity of the accusation. There are no rights of 
the defendant. There is no opportunity to confront the accusers. 
Little attention is given to the possibility that accusations might be 
made for impious purposes - jealousy, say, or revenge, or the 
greed of the inquisitors who routinely confiscated for their own 
private benefit the property of the accused. This technical manual 
for torturers also includes methods of punishment tailored to 
release demons from the victim's body before the process kills 
her. The Malleus in hand, the Pope's encouragement guaranteed, 
Inquisitors began springing up all over Europe. 
It quickly became an expense account scam. All costs of 
investigation, trial and execution were borne by the accused or her 
relatives, down to per diem for the private detectives hired to spy 
on her, wine for her guards, banquets for her judges, the travel 
expenses of a messenger sent to fetch a more experienced torturer 
from another city, and the faggots, tar and hangman's rope. Then 
there was a bonus to the members of the tribunal for each witch 
burned. The convicted witch's remaining property, if any, was 
divided between Church and State. As this legally and morally 
113 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
sanctioned mass murder and theft became institutionalized, as a 
vast bureaucracy arose to serve it, attention was turned from poor 
hags and crones to the middle class and well-to-do of both sexes. 
The more who, under torture, confessed to witchcraft, the 
harder it was to maintain that the whole business was mere 
fantasy. Since each 'witch' was made to implicate others, the 
numbers grew exponentially. These constituted 'frightful proofs 
that the Devil is still alive', as it was later put in America in the 
Salem witch trials. In a credulous age, the most fantastic testi-
mony was soberly accepted - that tens of thousands of witches had 
gathered for a Sabbath in public squares in France, or that 12,000 
of them darkened the skies as they flew to Newfoundland. The 
Bible had counselled, 'Thou shalt not suffer a witch to live.' 
Legions of women were burned to death.* And the most horren-
dous tortures were routinely applied to every defendant, young or 
old, after the instruments of torture were first blessed by the 
priests. Innocent himself died in 1492, following unsuccessful 
attempts to keep him alive by transfusion (which resulted in the 
deaths of three boys) and by suckling at the breast of a nursing 
mother. He was mourned by his mistress and their children. 
In Britain witch-finders, also called 'prickers', were employed, 
receiving a handsome bounty for each girl or woman they turned 
over for execution. They had no incentive to be cautious in their 
accusations. Typically they looked for 'devil's marks' - scars or 
birthmarks or nevi - that when pricked with a pin neither hurt nor 
bled. A simple sleight of hand often gave the appearance that the 
pin penetrated deep into the witch's flesh. When no visible marks 
were apparent, 'invisible marks' sufficed. Upon the gallows, one 
mid-seventeenth-century pricker 'confessed he had been the death 
of above 220 women in England and Scotland, for the gain of 
twenty shillings apiece'.
† 
* This mode of execution was adopted by the Holy Inquisition apparently to 
guarantee literal accord with a well-intentioned sentence of canon law (Council 
of Tours, 1163): 'The Church abhors bloodshed.' 
† In the murky territory of bounty hunters and paid informers, vile corruption is 
often the rule - worldwide and through all of human history. To take an 
example almost at random, in 1994, for a fee, a group of postal inspectors from 
114 


The Demon-Haunted World 
In the witch trials, mitigating evidence or defence witnesses 
were inadmissible. In any case, it was nearly impossible to provide 
compelling alibis for accused witches: the rules of evidence had a 
special character. For example, in more than one case a husband 
attested that his wife was asleep in his arms at the very moment 
she was accused of frolicking with the devil at a witch's Sabbath; 
but the archbishop patiently explained that a demon had taken the 
place of the wife. The husbands were not to imagine that their 
powers of perception could exceed Satan's powers of deception. 
The beautiful young women were perforce consigned to the 
flames. 
There were strong erotic and misogynistic elements, as might be 
expected in a sexually repressed, male-dominated society with 
inquisitors drawn from the class of nominally celibate priests. The 
trials paid close attention to the quality and quantity of orgasm in 
the supposed copulations of defendants with demons or the Devil 
(although Augustine had been certain 'we cannot call the Devil a 
fornicator'), and to the nature of the Devil's 'member' (cold, by 
all reports). 'Devil's marks' were found 'generally on the breasts 
or private parts' according to Ludovico Sinistrari's 1700 book. As 
a result pubic hair was shaved, and the genitalia were carefully 
inspected by the exclusively male inquisitors. In the immolation of 
the 20-year-old Joan of Arc, after her dress had caught fire the 
Hangman of Rouen slaked the flames so onlookers could view 'all 
the secrets which can or should be in a woman'. 
The chronicle of those who were consumed by fire in the single 
German city of Wurzburg in the single year 1598 penetrates the 
statistics and lets us confront a little of the human reality: 
The steward of the senate, named Gering; old Mrs Kanzler; 
the tailor's fat wife; the woman cook of Mr Mengerdorf; a 
stranger; a strange woman; Baunach, a senator, the fattest 
citizen in Wurtzburg; the old smith of the court; an old 
woman; a little girl, nine or ten years old; a younger girl, her 
little sister; the mother of the two little aforementioned girls; 
Cleveland, USA, agreed to go underground and ferret out wrongdoers; they 
then contrived criminal cases against 32 innocent postal workers. 
115 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
Liebler's daughter; Goebel's child, the most beautiful girl in 
Wurtzburg; a student who knew many languages; two boys 
from the Minster, each twelve years old; Stepper's little 
daughter; the woman who kept the bridge gate; an old 
woman; the little son of the town council bailiff; the wife of 
Knertz, the butcher; the infant daughter of Dr Schultz; a 
blind girl; Schwartz, canon at Hach . . . 
On and on it goes. Some were given special humane attention: 
'The little daughter of Valkenberger was privately executed and 
burned.' There were twenty-eight public immolations, each with 
four to six victims on average, in that small city in a single year. 
This was a microcosm of what was happening all across Europe. 
No one knows how many were killed altogether - perhaps 
hundreds of thousands, perhaps millions. Those responsible for 
prosecuting, torturing, judging, burning and justifying were self-
less. Just ask them. 
They could not be mistaken. The confessions of witchcraft 
could not be based on hallucinations, say, or attempts to satisfy 
the inquisitors and stop the torture. In such a case, explained the 
witch judge Pierre de Lancre (in his 1612 book, Description of the 
Inconstancy of Evil Angels), the Catholic Church would be 
committing a great crime by burning witches. Those who raise 
such possibilities are thus attacking the Church and ipso facto 
committing a mortal sin. Critics of witch-burning were punished 
and, in some cases, themselves burnt. The inquisitors and tortur-
ers were doing God's work. They were saving souls. They were 
foiling demons. 
Witchcraft of course was not the only offence that merited 
torture and burning at the stake. Heresy was a still more serious 
crime, and both Catholics and Protestants punished it ruthlessly. 
In the sixteenth century the scholar William Tyndale had the 
temerity to contemplate translating the New Testament into 
English. But if people could actually read the Bible in their own 
language instead of arcane Latin, they could form their own, 
independent religious views. They might conceive of their own 
private unintermediated line to God. This was a challenge to the 
job security of Roman Catholic priests. When Tyndale tried to 
116 


The Demon-Haunted World 
publish his translation, he was hounded and pursued all over 
Europe. Eventually he was captured, garrotted, and then, for 
good measure, burned at the stake. His copies of the New 
Testament (which a century later became the basis of the exquisite 
King James translation) were then hunted down house-to-house 
by armed posses - Christians piously defending Christianity by 
preventing other Christians from knowing the words of Christ. 
Such a cast of mind, such a climate of absolute confidence that 
knowledge should be rewarded by torture and death were unlikely 
to help those accused of witchcraft. 
Burning witches is a feature of Western civilization that has, 
with occasional political exceptions, declined since the six-
teenth century. In the last judicial execution of witches in 
England, a woman and her nine-year-old daughter were 
hanged. Their crime was raising a rain storm by taking their 
stockings off. In our time, witches and djinns are found as 
regular fare in children's entertainment, exorcism of demons is 
still practised by the Roman Catholic and other Churches, and 
the proponents of one cult still denounce as sorcery the cultic 
practices of another. We still use the word 'pandemonium' 
(literally, all demons). A crazed and violent person is still said 
to be demonic. (Not until the eighteenth century was mental 
illness no longer generally ascribed to supernatural causes; 
even insomnia had been considered a punishment inflicted by 
demons.) More than half of Americans tell pollsters they 
'believe' in the Devil's existence, and ten per cent have 
communicated with him, as Martin Luther reported he did 
regularly. In a 1992 'spiritual warfare manual' called Prepare 
for War, Rebecca Brown informs us that abortion and sex 
outside of marriage 'will almost always result in demonic 
infestation'; that meditation, yoga and martial arts are designed 
so unsuspecting Christians will be seduced into worshipping 
demons; and that 'rock music didn't "just happen", it was a 
carefully masterminded plan by none other than Satan himself. 
Sometimes 'your loved ones are demonically bound and 
blinded'. Demonology is today still part and parcel of many 
earnest faiths. 
And what is it that demons do? In the Malleus, Kramer and 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
Sprenger reveal that 'devils . . . busy themselves by interfering 
with the process of normal copulation and conception, by obtain-
ing human semen, and themselves transferring it'. Demonic 
artificial insemination in the Middle Ages goes back at least to St 
Thomas Aquinas, who tells us in On the Trinity that 'demons can 
transfer the semen which they have collected and inject it into the 
bodies of others'. His contemporary, St Bonaventura, spells it out 
in a little more detail: succubi 'yield to males and receive their 
semen; by cunning skills, the demons preserve its potency, and 
afterwards, with the permission of God, they become incubi and 
pour it out into female repositories'. The products of these 
demon-mediated unions are also, when they grow up, visited by 
demons. A multi-generational trans-species sexual bond is forged. 
And these creatures, we recall, are well known to fly; indeed they 
inhabit the upper air. 
There is no spaceship in these stories. But most of the central 
elements of the alien abduction account are present, including 
sexually obsessive non-humans who live in the sky, walk through 
walls, communicate telepathically, and perform breeding experi-
ments on the human species. Unless we believe that demons really 
exist, how can we understand so strange a belief-system, 
embraced by the whole Western world (including those consid-
ered the wisest among us), reinforced by personal experience in 
every generation, and taught by Church and State? Is there any 
real alternative besides a shared delusion based on common brain 
wiring and chemistry? 
In Genesis we read of angels who couple with 'the daughters of 
men'. The culture myths of ancient Greece and Rome told of gods 
appearing to women as bulls or swans or showers of gold and 
impregnating them. In one early Christian tradition, philosophy 
derived not from human ingenuity but out of demonic pillow talk, 
the fallen angels betraying the secrets of Heaven to their human 
consorts. Accounts with similar elements appear in cultures 
around the world. Parallels to incubi include Arabian djinn, 
Greek satyrs, Hindu bhuts, Samoan hotua poro, Celtic dusii and 
many others. In an epoch of demon hysteria, it was easy enough to 
demonize those we feared or hated. So Merlin was said to have 
118 


The Demon-Haunted World 
been fathered by an incubus. So were Plato, Alexander the Great, 
Augustus and Martin Luther. Occasionally an entire people - for 
example the Huns or the inhabitants of Cyprus - were accused by 
their enemies of having been sired by demons. 
In Talmudic tradition the archetypical succubus was Lilith, 
whom God made from the dust along with Adam. She was 
expelled from Eden for insubordination - not to God, but to 
Adam. Ever since, she spends her nights seducing Adam's 
descendants. In ancient Iranian and many other cultures, noctur-
nal seminal emissions were believed to be elicited by succubi. St 
Teresa of Avila reported a vivid sexual encounter with an angel -
an angel of light, not of darkness, she was sure - as did other 
women later sanctified by the Catholic Church. Cagliostro, the 
eighteenth-century magician and con man, let it be understood 
that he, like Jesus of Nazareth, was a product of the union 
'between the children of heaven and earth'. 
In 1645 a Cornish teenager, Anne Jefferies, was found groggy, 
crumpled on the floor. Much later, she recalled being attacked by 
half a dozen little men, carried paralysed to a castle in the air, 
seduced and returned home. She called the little men fairies. (For 
many pious Christians, as for the inquisitors of Joan of Arc, this 
was a distinction without a difference. Fairies were demons, plain 
and simple.) They returned to terrify and torment her. The next 
year she was arrested for witchcraft. Fairies traditionally have 
magical powers and can cause paralysis by the merest touch. The 
ordinary passage of time is slowed in fairyland. Fairies are 
reproductively impaired, so they have sex with humans and carry 
off babies from their cradles, sometimes leaving a fairy substitute, 
a 'changeling'. Now it seems a fair question: if Anne Jefferies had 
grown up in a culture touting aliens rather than fairies, and UFOs 
rather than castles in the air, would her story have been distin-
guishable in any significant respect from the ones 'abductees' tell? 
In his 1982 book The Terror That Comes in the Night: An 
Experience-Centered Study of Supernatural Assault Traditions, David 
Hufford describes an executive, university-educated, in his mid-
thirties, who recalled a summer spent as a teenager in his aunt's 
house. One night, he saw mysterious lights moving in the harbour. 
Afterwards, he fell asleep. From his bed he then witnessed a white, 
119 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
glowing figure climbing the stairs. She entered his room, paused, and 
then said - anticlimactically, it seems to me - 'That is the linoleum.' 
Some nights the figure was an old woman; in others, an elephant. 
Sometimes the young man was convinced the entire business was a 
dream; other times he was certain he was awake. He was pressed 
down into his bed, paralysed, unable to move or cry out. His heart 
was pounding. He was short of breath. Similar events transpired on 
many consecutive nights. What is happening here? These events 
took place before alien abductions were widely described. If the 
young man had known about alien abductions, would his old woman 
have had a large head and bigger eyes? 
In several famous passages in The Decline and Fall of the 
Roman Empire, Edward Gibbon described the balance between 
credulity and scepticism in late classical antiquity: 
Credulity performed the office of faith; fanaticism was per-
mitted to assume the language of inspiration, and the effects 
of accident or contrivance were ascribed to supernatural 
causes . . . 
In modern times [Gibbon is writing in the middle eight-
eenth century], a latent and even involuntary scepticism 
adheres to the most pious dispositions. Their admission of 
supernatural truths is much less an active consent than a cold 
and passive acquiescence. Accustomed long since to observe 
and to respect the invariable order of Nature, our reason, or 
at least our imagination, is not sufficiently prepared to sustain 
the visible action of the Deity. But in the first ages of 
Christianity the situation of mankind was extremely different. 
The most curious, or the most credulous, among the pagans 
were often persuaded to enter into a society which asserted 
an actual claim of miraculous powers. The primitive Chris-
tians perpetually trod on mystic ground, and their minds were 
exercised by the habits of believing the most extraordinary 
events. They felt, or they fancied, that on every side they 
were incessantly assaulted by daemons, comforted by visions, 
instructed by prophecy, and surprisingly delivered from dan-
ger, sickness, and from death itself, by the supplications of 
the church . . . 
120 


The Demon-Haunted World 
It was their firm persuasion that the air which they 
breathed was peopled with invisible enemies; with innumer-
able daemons, who watched every occasion, and assumed 
every form, to terrify, and above all to tempt, their 
unguarded virtue. The imagination, and even the senses, 
were deceived by the illusions of distempered fanaticism; and 
the hermit, whose midnight prayer was oppressed by involun-
tary slumber, might easily confound the phantoms of horror 
or delight which had occupied his sleeping and his waking 
dreams . . . 
[T]he practice of superstition is so congenial to the multi-
tude that, if they are forcibly awakened, they still regret the 
loss of their pleasing vision. Their love of the marvellous and 
supernatural, their curiosity with regard to future events, and 
their strong propensity to extend their hopes and fears 
beyond the limits of the visible world, were the principal 
causes which favoured the establishment of Polytheism. So 
urgent on the vulgar is the necessity of believing, that the fall 
of any system of mythology will most probably be succeeded 
by the introduction of some other mode of superstition . . . 
Put aside Gibbon's social snobbery: the devil tormented the upper 
classes too, and even a king of England - James I, the first Stuart 
monarch - wrote a credulous and superstitious book on demons 
(Daemonologie, 1597). He was also the patron of the great 
translation of the Bible into English that still bears his name. It 
was King James's opinion that tobacco is the 'devil's weed', and a 
number of witches were exposed through their addiction to this 
drug. But by 1628, James had become a thoroughgoing sceptic -
mainly because adolescents had been found faking demonic 
possession, in which state they had accused innocent people of 
witchcraft. If we reckon the scepticism that Gibbon says charac-
terized his time to have declined in ours, and if even a little of the 
rampant gullibility he attributes to late classical times is left over 
in ours, should we not expect something like demons to find a 
niche in the popular culture of the present? 
Of course, as enthusiasts for extraterrestrial visitations are 
quick to remind me, there's another interpretation of these 
121 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
historical parallels: aliens, they say, have always been visiting us, 
poking at us, stealing our sperms and eggs, impregnating us. In 
earlier times we recognized them as gods, demons, fairies, or 
spirits; only now do we understand that it's aliens who've been 
diddling us all these millennia. Jacques Vallee has made such 
arguments. But then why are there virtually no reports of flying 
saucers prior to 1947? Why is it that none of the world's major 
religions uses saucers as icons of the divine? Why no warnings 
about the dangers of high technology then? Why isn't this genetic 
experiment, whatever its objective, completed by now, thousands 
of years or more after its initiation by beings supposedly of vastly 
superior technological attainments? Why are we in such trouble if 
the breeding programme is designed to improve our lot? 
Following this line of argument, we might anticipate present 
adherents of the old beliefs to understand 'aliens' to be fairies, 
gods, or demons. In fact, there are several contemporary sects -
the 'Raelians', for example - that hold gods or God to come to 
earth in UFOs. Some abductees describe the aliens, however 
repulsive, as 'angels', or 'emissaries of God'. And there are those 
who still think it's demons. 
In Whitley Strieber's Communion, a first-hand account of 'alien 
abduction', the author relates 
Whatever was there seemed so monstrously ugly, so filthy 
and dark and sinister. Of course they were demons. They had 
to be . . . I still remember that thing crouching there, so 
terribly ugly, its arms and legs like the limbs of a great insect, 
its eyes glaring at me. 
Reportedly, Strieber is now open to the possibility that these 
night-time terrors were dreams or hallucinations. 
Articles on UFOs in The Christian News Encyclopedia, a 
fundamentalist compilation, include 'Unchristian Fanatic Obses-
sion', and 'Scientist Believes UFOs Work of Devil'. The Spiritual 
Counterfeits Project of Berkeley, California, teaches that UFOs 
are of demonic origin; the Aquarian Church of Universal Service 
of McMinnville, Oregon, that all aliens are hostile. A 1993 
newsletter of 'Cosmic Awareness Communications' informs us 
122 


The Demon-Haunted World 
that UFO occupants think of humans as laboratory animals, wish 
us to worship them, but tend to be deterred by the Lord's Prayer. 
Some abductees have been cast out of their evangelical religious 
congregations; their stories sound too close to satanism. A 1980 
fundamentalist tract, The Cult Explosion, by Dave Hunt, reveals 
that 
UFOs . . . are clearly not physical and seem to be demonic 
manifestations from another dimension calculated to alter 
man's way of thinking . . . [T]he alleged UFO entities that 
have presumably communicated psychically with humans 
have always preached the same four lies that the serpent 
introduced to Eve . . . [T]hese beings are demons and they 
are preparing for the Antichrist. 
A number of sects hold UFOs and alien abductions to be 
premonitions of 'end-times'. 
If UFOs come from another planet or another dimension, were 
they sent by the same God who has been revealed to us in any of 
the major religions? Nothing in the UFO phenomena, the funda-
mentalist complaint goes, requires belief in the one, true God, 
while much in it contradicts the God portrayed in the Bible and 
Christian tradition. The New Age: A Christian Critique by Ralph 
Rath (1990) discusses UFOs, typically for such literature, with 
extreme credulity. It serves their purpose to accept UFOs as real 
and revile them as instruments of Satan and the Antichrist, rather 
than to use the blade of scientific scepticism. That tool, once 
honed, might accomplish more than just a limited heresiotomy. 
The Christian fundamentalist author Hal Lindsey, in his 1994 
religious best-seller Planet Earth - 2000 AD, writes, 
I have become thoroughly convinced that UFOs are real . . . 
They are operated by alien beings of great intelligence and 
power . . . I believe these beings are not only extraterrestrial 
but supernatural in origin. To be blunt, I think they are 
demons . . . part of a Satanic plot. 
And what is the evidence for this conclusion? Chiefly, it is the 
123 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
eleventh and twelfth verses of Luke, Chapter 21, in which Jesus 
talks about 'great signs from Heaven' - nothing like a UFO is 
described - in the last days. Typically, Lindsey ignores verse 32 in 
which Jesus makes it very clear he is talking about events in the 
first, not the twentieth, century. 
There is also a Christian tradition according to which 
extraterrestrial life cannot exist. In Christian News for 23 May 
1994, for example, W. Gary Crampton, Doctor of Theology, tells 
us: 
The Bible, either explicitly or implicitly, speaks to every area 
of life; it never leaves us without an answer. The Bible 
nowhere explicitly affirms or negates intelligent extraterres-
trial life. Implicitly, however, Scripture does deny the exist-
ence of such beings, thus also negating the possibility of flying 
saucers . . . Scripture views earth as the center of the uni-
verse . . . According to Peter, a 'planet hopping' Savior is out 
of the question. Here is an answer to intelligent life on other 
planets. If there were such, who would redeem them? 
Certainly not Christ . . . Experiences which are out of line 
with the teachings of Scripture must always be renounced as 
fallacious. The Bible has a monopoly on the truth. 
But many other Christian sects - Roman Catholics, for example -
are completely open-minded, with no a priori objections to and no 
insistence on the reality of aliens and UFOs. 
In the early 1960s, I argued that the UFO stories were crafted 
chiefly to satisfy religious longings. At a time when science has 
complicated uncritical adherence to the old-time religions, an 
alternative is proffered to the God hypothesis: dressed in scientific 
jargon, their immense powers 'explained' by superficially scien-
tific terminology, the gods and demons of old come down from 
heaven to haunt us, to offer prophetic visions, and to tantalize us 
with visions of a more hopeful future: a space-age mystery religion 
aborning. 
The folklorist Thomas E. Bullard wrote in 1989 that 
abduction reports sound like rewrites of older supernatural 
124 


The Demon-Haunted World 
encounter traditions with aliens serving the functional roles of 
divine beings. 
He concludes: 
Science may have evicted ghosts and witches from our beliefs, 
but it just as quickly filled the vacancy with aliens having the 
same functions. Only the extraterrestrial outer trappings are 
new. All the fear and the psychological dramas for dealing 
with it seem simply to have found their way home again, 
where it is business as usual in the legend realm where things 
go bump in the night. 
Is it possible that people in all times and places occasionally 
experience vivid, realistic hallucinations, often with sexual con-
tent, about abduction by strange, telepathic, aerial creatures who 
ooze through walls, with the details filled in by the prevailing 
cultural idioms, sucked out of the Zeitgeist? Others, who have not 
personally had the experience, find it stirring and in a way 
familiar. They pass the story on. Soon it takes on a life of its own, 
inspires others trying to understand their own visions and halluci-
nations, and enters the realm of folklore, myth and legend. The 
connection between the content of spontaneous temporal lobe 
hallucinations and the alien abduction paradigm is consistent with 
such a hypothesis. 
Perhaps when everyone knows that gods come down to Earth, 
we hallucinate gods; when all of us are familiar with demons, it's 
incubi and succubi; when fairies are widely accepted, we see 
fairies; in an age of spiritualism, we encounter spirits; and when 
the old myths fade and we begin thinking that extraterrestrial 
beings are plausible, then that's where our hypnogogic imagery 
tends. 
Snatches of song or foreign languages, images, events that we 
witnessed, stories that we overheard in childhood can be accu-
rately recalled decades later without any conscious memory of 
how they got into our heads. '[I]n violent fevers, men, all 
ignorance, have talked in ancient tongues,' says Herman Melville 
in Moby Dick; 'and . . . when the mystery is probed, it turns out 
125 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
always that in their wholly forgotten childhood those ancient 
tongues had been really spoken in their hearing.' In our everyday 
life, we effortlessly and unconsciously incorporate cultural norms 
and make them our own. 
A similar inhaling of motifs is present in schizophrenic 'com-
mand hallucinations'. Here people feel they are being told what to 
do by an imposing or mythic figure. They are ordered to assassi-
nate a political leader or a folk hero, or defeat the British 
invaders, or harm themselves, because it is the wish of God, or 
Jesus, or the Devil, or demons, or angels, or - lately - aliens. The 
schizophrenic is transfixed by a clear and powerful command from 
a voice that no one else can hear, and that the subject must 
somehow identify. Who would issue such a command? Who could 
speak inside our heads? The culture in which we've been raised 
offers up an answer. 
Think of the power of repetitive imagery in advertising, 
especially to suggestible viewers and readers. It can make us 
believe almost anything - even that smoking cigarettes is cool. 
In our time, putative aliens are the subject of innumerable 
science fiction stories, novels, TV dramas and films. UFOs are 
a regular feature of the weekly tabloids devoted to falsification 
and mystification. One of the highest-grossing motion pictures 
of all time is about aliens very like those described by abduct-
ees. Alien abduction accounts were comparatively rare until 
1975, when a credulous television dramatization of the Hill case 
was aired; another leap into public prominence occurred after 
1987, when Strieber's purported first-hand account with a 
haunting cover painting of a large-eyed 'alien' became a 
best-seller. In contrast, we hear very little lately about incubi, 
elves and fairies. Where have they all gone? 
Far from being global, such alien abduction stories are 
disappointingly local. The vast majority emanate from North 
America. They hardly transcend American culture. In other 
countries, bird-headed, insect-headed, reptilian, robot, and 
blond and blue-eyed aliens are reported (the last, predictably, 
from northern Europe). Each group of aliens is said to behave 
differently. Clearly cultural factors are playing an important 
role. 


The Demon-Haunted World 
Long before the terms 'flying saucer' or 'UFOs' were invented, 
science fiction was replete with 'little green men' and 'bug-eyed 
monsters'. Somehow small hairless beings with big heads (and 
eyes) have been our staple aliens for a long time. You could see 
them routinely in the science fiction pulp magazines of the 
twenties and thirties (and, for example, in an illustration of a 
Martian sending radio messages to Earth in the December 1937 
issue of the magazine Short Wave and Television). It goes back 
perhaps to our remote descendants as depicted by the British 
science fiction pioneer, H.G. Wells. Wells argued that humans 
evolved from smaller-brained but hairier primates with an athleti-
cism far exceeding that of Victorian academics; extrapolating this 
trend into the far future, he suggested that our descendants should 
be nearly hairless, with immense heads, although barely able to 
walk around on their own. Advanced beings from other worlds 
might be similarly endowed. 
The typical modern extraterrestrial reported in America in the 
eighties and early nineties is small, with disproportionately large 
head and eyes, undeveloped facial features, no visible eyebrows 
or genitals, and smooth grey skin. It looks to me eerily like a 
foetus in roughly the twelfth week of pregnancy, or a starving 
child. Why so many of us might be obsessing on foetuses or 
malnourished children, and imagining them attacking and sexually 
manipulating us, is an interesting question. 
In recent years in America, aliens different from the short grey 
motif have been on the rise. One psychotherapist, Richard Boylan 
of Sacramento, says: 
You've got three-and-a-half-foot to four-foot types; you've 
got five- to six-foot types; you've got seven- to eight-foot 
types; you've got three-, four-, and five-finger types, pads on 
the ends of fingers or suction cups; you've got webbed or 
non-webbed fingers; you've got large almond-shape eyes 
slanted upward, outward, or horizontally; in some cases large 
ovoid eyes without the almond slant; you've got extraterres-
trials with slit pupils; you've got other different body types -
the so-called Praying Mantis type, the reptoid types . . . 
These are the ones that I keep getting recurrently. There are 
127 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
a few exotic and single case reports that I tend to be a little 
cautious about until I get a lot more corroborative. 
Despite this apparent variety of extraterrestrials, the UFO abduc-
tion syndrome portrays, it seems to me, a banal Universe. The 
form of the supposed aliens is marked by the failure of the 
imagination and a preoccupation with human concerns. Not a 
single being presented in all these accounts is as astonishing as a 
cockatoo would be if you had never before beheld a bird. Any 
protozoology or bacteriology or mycology textbook is filled with 
wonders that far outshine the most exotic descriptions of the alien 
abductionists. The believers take the common elements in their 
stories as tokens of verisimilitude, rather than as evidence that 
they have contrived their stories out of a shared culture and 
biology. 
128 


8 
On the Distinction between 
True and False Visions 
A credulous mind . . . finds most delight in believing 
strange things, and the stranger they are the easier they pass 
with him; but never regards those that are plain and 
feasible, for every man can believe such. 
F
or just an instant in the darkened room I sense an apparition -
could it be a ghost? Or there's a flicker of motion; I see it out 
of the corner of my eye, but when I turn my head there's nothing 
there. Is that a telephone ringing, or is it just my 'imagination'? In 
astonishment, I seem to be smelling the salt air of the Coney 
Island summer seashore of my childhood. I turn a corner in the 
foreign city I'm visiting for the first time, and before me is a street 
so familiar I feel I've known it all my life. 
In these commonplace experiences, we're generally unsure 
what to do next. Were my eyes (or ears, or nose, or memory) 
playing 'tricks' on me? Or did I really and truly witness something 
out of the ordinary course of Nature? Shall I keep quiet about it, 
or shall I tell? 
The answer depends very much on my environment, friends, 
loved ones and culture. In an obsessively rigid, practically ori-
ented society, perhaps I would be cautious about admitting to 
such experiences. They might mark me as flighty, unsound, 
unreliable. But in a society that readily believes in ghosts, say, or 
Samuel Butler, Characters (1667-9) 
129 
