THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
variation runs to bell-type curves. There's an average value of any 
quality, and smaller numbers of people running off in both 
extremes. 
Some stereotyping is the result of not controlling the variables, 
of forgetting what other factors might be in play. For example, it 
used to be that there were almost no women in science. Many 
male scientists were vehement: this proved that women lacked the 
ability to do science. Temperamentally, it didn't fit them, it was 
too difficult, it required a kind of intelligence that women don't 
have, they're too emotional to be objective, can you think of any 
great women theoretical physicists? . . . and so on. Since then the 
barriers have come tumbling down. Today women populate most 
of the subdisciplines of science. In my own fields of astronomy and 
planetary studies, women have recently burst upon the scene, 
making discovery after discovery, and providing a desperately 
needed breath of fresh air. 
So what data were they missing, all those famous male scientists 
of the 1950s and 1960s and earlier who had pronounced so 
authoritatively on the intellectual deficiencies of women? Plainly, 
society was preventing women from entering science, and then 
criticizing them for it, confusing cause and effect: 
You want to be an astronomer, young woman? Sorry. 
Why can't you? Because you're unsuited. 
How do we know you're unsuited? Because women have never 
been astronomers. 
Put so baldly, the case sounds absurd. But the contrivances of 
bias can be subtle. The despised group is rejected by spurious 
arguments, sometimes done with such confidence and contempt 
that many of us, including some of the victims themselves, fail to 
recognize it as self-serving sleight of hand. 
Casual observers of meetings of sceptics, and those who glance 
at the list of CSICOP Fellows, have noted a great preponderance 
of men. Others claim disproportionate numbers of women among 
believers in astrology (horoscopes in most 'women's' but few 
'men's' magazines), crystals, ESP and the like. Some commenta-
tors suggest that there is something peculiarly male about scepti-
cism. It's hard-driving, competitive, confrontational, tough-
minded - whereas women, they say, are more accepting, 
356 


Maxwell and The Nerds 
consensus-building, and uninterested in challenging conventional 
wisdom. But in my experience women scientists have just as finely 
honed sceptical senses as their male counterparts; that's just part 
of being a scientist. This criticism, if that's what it is, is presented 
to the world in the usual ragged disguise: if you discourage women 
from being sceptical and don't train them in scepticism, then sure 
enough you may find that many women aren't sceptical. Open the 
doors and let them in, and they're as sceptical as anybody else. 
One of the stereotyped occupations is science. Scientists are 
nerds, socially inept, working on incomprehensible subjects that 
no normal person would find in any way interesting - even if he 
were willing to invest the time required, which, again, no sensible 
person would. 'Get a life,' you might want to tell them. 
I asked for a fleshed-out contemporary characterization of 
science-nerds from an expert on eleven-year-olds of my acquaint-
ance. I should stress that she is merely reporting, not necessarily 
endorsing, the conventional prejudices: 
Nerds wear their belts just under their rib cages. Their short-sleeve 
shirts are equipped with pocket protectors in which is displayed a 
formidable array of multicoloured pens and pencils. A programma-
ble calculator is carried in a special belt holster. They all wear thick 
glasses with broken nose-pieces that have been repaired with Band-
Aids. They are bereft of social skills, and oblivious or indifferent to 
the lack. When they laugh, what comes out is a snort. They jabber at 
each other in an incomprehensible language. They'll jump at the 
opportunity to work for extra credit in all classes except gym. They 
look down on normal people, who in turn laugh at them. Most nerds 
have names like Norman. (The Norman Conquest involved a horde 
of high-belted, pocket-protected, calculator-carrying nerds with bro-
ken glasses invading England.) There are more boy nerds than girl 
nerds, but there are plenty of both. Nerds don't date. If you're a nerd 
you can't be cool. Also vice versa. 
This of course is a stereotype. There are scientists who dress 
elegantly, who are devastatingly cool, who many people long to date, 
who do not carry concealed calculators to social events. Some you'd 
never guess were scientists if you invited them to your home. 
But other scientists do match the stereotype, more or less. 
They're pretty socially inept. There may be, proportionately, 
357 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
many more nerds among scientists than among backhoe operators 
or fashion designers or traffic wardens. Perhaps scientists are 
more nerdish than bartenders or surgeons or short-order cooks. 
Why should this be? Maybe people untalented in getting along 
with others find a refuge in impersonal pursuits, particularly 
mathematics and the physical sciences. Maybe the serious study of 
difficult subjects requires so much time and dedication that very 
little is left over for learning more than the barest social niceties. 
Maybe it's a combination of both. 
Like the mad-scientist image to which it's closely related, the 
nerd-scientist stereotype is pervasive in our society. What's wrong 
with a little good-natured fun at the expense of scientists? If, for 
whatever reason, people dislike the stereotypical scientist, they are 
less likely to support science. Why subsidize geeks to pursue their 
absurd and incomprehensible little projects? Well, we know the 
answer to that: science is supported because it provides spectacular 
benefits at all levels in society, as I have argued earlier in this book. 
So those who find nerds distasteful, but at the same time crave the 
products of science, face a kind of dilemma. A tempting resolution is 
to direct the activities of the scientists. Don't give them money to go 
off in weird directions; instead tell them what we need - this 
invention, or that process. Subsidize not the curiosity of the nerds, 
but what will benefit society. It seems simple enough. 
The trouble is that ordering someone to go out and make a specific 
invention, even if price is no object, hardly guarantees that it gets 
done. There may be an underpinning of knowledge that's unavail-
able, without which no one will ever build the contrivance you have 
in mind. And the history of science shows that often you can't go 
after the underpinnings in a directed way, either. They may emerge 
out of the idle musings of some lonely young person off in the 
boondocks. They're ignored or rejected even by other scientists, 
sometimes until a new generation of scientists comes along. Urging 
major practical inventions while discouraging curiosity-driven 
research would be spectacularly counterproductive. 
Suppose you are, by the Grace of God, Victoria, Queen of the 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland, and Defender of 
the Faith in the most prosperous and triumphant age of the British 
358 


Maxwell and The Nerds 
Empire. Your dominions stretch across the planet. Maps of the 
world are abundantly splashed with British pink. You preside over 
the world's leading technological power. The steam engine is 
perfected in Great Britain, largely by Scottish engineers, who 
provide technical expertise on the railways and steamships that 
bind up the Empire. 
Suppose in the year 1860 you have a visionary idea, so daring it 
would have been rejected by Jules Verne's publisher. You want a 
machine that will carry your voice, as well as moving pictures of 
the glory of the Empire, into every home in the kingdom. What's 
more, the sounds and pictures must come not through conduits or 
wires, but somehow out of the air, so people at work and in the 
field can receive instantaneous inspirational offerings designed to 
insure loyalty and the work ethic. The Word of God could also be 
conveyed by the same contrivance. Other socially desirable appli-
cations would doubtless be found. 
So with the Prime Minister's support, you convene the Cabinet, 
the Imperial General Staff, and the leading scientists and engi-
neers of the Empire. You will allocate a million pounds, you tell 
them - big money in 1860. If they need more, just ask. You don't 
care how they do it; just get it done. Oh, yes, it's to be called the 
Westminster Project. 
Probably there would be some useful inventions emerging out 
of such an endeavour - 'spin-off. There always are when you 
spend huge amounts of money on technology. But the Westmin-
ster Project would almost certainly fail. Why? Because the 
underlying science hadn't been done. By 1860 the telegraph was in 
existence. You could imagine at great expense telegraphy sets in 
every home, with people ditting and dahing messages out in 
Morse code. But that's not what the Queen asked for. She had 
radio and television in mind but they were far out of reach. 
In the real world, the physics necessary to invent radio and 
television would come from a direction that no one could have 
predicted. 
James Clerk Maxwell was born in Edinburgh, Scotland, in 1831. 
At age two he found that he could use a tin plate to bounce an 
image of the Sun off the furniture and make it dance against the 
walls. As his parents came running he cried out, 'It's the Sun! I got 
359 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
it with the tin plate!' In his boyhood, he was fascinated by bugs, 
grubs, rocks, flowers, lenses, machines. 'It was humiliating,' later 
recalled his Aunt Jane, 'to be asked so many questions one 
couldn't answer by a child like that.' 
Naturally, by the time he got to school he was called 'Dafty' -
not quite right in the head. He was an exceptionally handsome 
young man, but he dressed carelessly, for comfort rather than 
style, and his Scottish provincialisms in speech and conduct were a 
cause for derision, especially by the time he reached college. And 
he had peculiar interests. 
Maxwell was a nerd. He fared little better with his teachers than 
with his fellow students. Here's a poignant couplet he wrote at the 
time: 
Ye years roll on, and haste the expected time 
When flogging boys shall be accounted crime. 
Many years later, in 1872, in his inaugural lecture as professor of 
experimental physics at Cambridge University, he alluded to the 
nerdish stereotype: 
It is not so long ago since any man who devoted himself to 
geometry, or to any science requiring continued application, 
was looked upon as necessarily a misanthrope, who must 
have abandoned all human interests, and betaken himself to 
abstractions so far removed from all the world of life and 
action that he has become insensible alike to the attractions 
of pleasure and to the claims of duty. 
I suspect that 'not so long ago' was Maxwell's way of recalling the 
experiences of his youth. He then went on to say, 
In the present day, men of science are not looked upon with 
the same awe or with the same suspicion. They are supposed 
to be in league with the material spirit of the age, and to form 
a kind of advanced Radical party among men of learning. 
We no longer live in a time of untrammelled optimism about the 
360 


Maxwell and The Nerds 
benefits of science and technology. We understand that there is a 
downside. Circumstances today are much closer to what Maxwell 
remembered from his childhood. 
He made enormous contributions to astronomy and physics -
from the conclusive demonstration that the rings of Saturn are 
composed of small particles, to the elastic properties of solids, 
to the disciplines now called the kinetic theory of gases and 
statistical mechanics. It was he who first showed that an 
enormous number of tiny molecules, moving on their own and 
incessantly colliding with each other and bouncing elastically, 
leads not to confusion, but to precise statistical laws. The 
properties of such a gas can be predicted and understood. (The 
bell-shaped curve that describes the speeds of molecules in a 
gas is now called the Maxwell-Boltzmann distribution.) He 
invented a mythical being, now 'Maxwell's demon', whose 
actions generated a paradox that took modern information 
theory and quantum mechanics to resolve. 
The nature of light had been a mystery since antiquity. There 
were acrimonious learned debates on whether it was a particle 
or a wave. Popular definitions ran to the style, 'Light is 
darkness - lit up'. Maxwell's greatest contribution was his 
discovery that electricity and magnetism, of all things, join 
together to become light. The now conventional understanding 
of the electromagnetic spectrum - running in wavelength from 
gamma rays to X-rays to ultraviolet light to visible light to 
infrared light to radio waves - is due to Maxwell. So is radio, 
television and radar. 
But Maxwell wasn't after any of this. He was interested in how 
electricity makes magnetism and vice versa. I want to describe 
what Maxwell did, but his historic accomplishment is highly 
mathematical. In a few pages, I can at best give you only a flavour. 
If you do not fully understand what I'm about to say, please bear 
with me. There's no way we can get a feeling for what Maxwell did 
without looking at a little mathematics. 
Mesmer, the inventor of 'mesmerism', believed he had 
discovered a magnetic fluid, 'almost the same thing as the 
electric fluid', that permeated all things. On this matter as well, 
he was mistaken. We now know that there is no special 
361 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
magnetic fluid, and that all magnetism - including the power 
that resides in a bar or horseshoe magnet - is due to moving 
electricity. The Danish physicist Hans Christian Oersted had 
performed a little experiment in which electricity was made to 
flow down a wire and induce a nearby compass needle to waver 
and tremble. The wire and the compass were not in physical 
contact. The great English physicist Michael Faraday had done 
the complementary experiment: he made a magnetic force turn 
on and off and thereby generated a current of electricity in a 
nearby wire. Time-varying electricity had somehow reached out 
and generated magnetism, and time-varying magnetism had 
somehow reached out and generated electricity. This was called 
'induction' and was deeply mysterious, close to magic. 
Faraday proposed that the magnet had an invisible 'field' of 
force that extended into surrounding space, stronger close to the 
magnet, weaker farther away. You could track the form of the 
field by placing tiny iron filings on a piece of paper and waving a 
magnet underneath. Likewise, your hair after a good combing on 
a low-humidity day generates an electric field which invisibly 
extends out from your head, and which can even make small 
pieces of paper move by themselves. 
The electricity in a wire, we now know, is caused by 
submicroscopic electrical particles, called electrons, which 
respond to an electric field and move. The wires are made of 
materials like copper which have lots of free electrons -
electrons not bound within atoms, but able to move. Unlike 
copper, though, most materials, say, wood, are not good 
conductors; they are instead insulators or 'dielectrics'. In them, 
comparatively few electrons are available to move in response 
to the impressed electric or magnetic field. Not much of a 
current is produced. Of course there's some movement or 
'displacement' of electrons, and the bigger the electric field, the 
more displacement occurs. 
Maxwell devised a way of writing what was known about 
electricity and magnetism in his time, a method of summarizing 
precisely all those experiments with wires and currents and 
magnets. Here they are, the four Maxwell equations for the 
behaviour of electricity and magnetism in matter: 
362 


Maxwell and The Nerds 
It takes a few years of university­level physics to understand these 
equations. They are written using a branch of mathematics called 
vector calculus. A vector, written in bold­face type, is any 
quantity with both a magnitude and a direction. Sixty miles an 
hour isn't a vector, but sixty miles an hour due north on Highway 
1 is. E and B represent the electric and magnetic fields. The 
triangle, called a nabla (because of its resemblance to a certain 
ancient Middle Eastern harp), expresses how the electric or 
magnetic fields vary in three­dimensional space. The 'dot product' 
and the 'cross product' after the nablas are statements of two 
different kinds of spatial variation. 
represent the time variation, the rate of change of the 
electric and magnetic fields. j stands for the electrical current. The 
lower­case Greek letter p (rho) represents the density of electrical 
charges, while ε0 (pronounced 'epsilon zero') and μ0 (pronounced 
'mu zero') are not variables, but properties of the substance E and 
B are measured in, and determined by experiment. In a vacuum, 
ε0 and μ0 are constants of nature. 
Considering how many different quantities are being brought 
together in these equations, it's striking how simple they are. They 
could have gone on for pages, but they don't. 
The first of the four Maxwell equations tells how an electric 
field due to electrical charges (electrons, for example) varies with 
distance (it gets weaker the farther away we go). But the greater 
the charge density (the more electrons, say, in a given space), the 
stronger the field. 
The second equation tells us that there's no comparable state­
ment in magnetism, because Mesmer's magnetic 'charges' (or 
magnetic 'monopoles') do not exist: saw a magnet in half and you 
won't be holding an isolated 'north' pole and an isolated 'south' 
pole; each piece now has its own 'north' and 'south' pole. 
The third equation tells us how a changing magnetic field 
induces an electric field. 
363 
and 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
He set p equal to zero, indicating that there are no electrical 
charges. He also set j equal to zero, indicating that there are no 
electrical currents. But he didn't discard the last term in the fourth 
the feeble displacement current in insulators. 
Why not? As you can see from the equations, Maxwell's 
intuition preserved the symmetry between the magnetic and 
electric fields. Even in a vacuum, in the total absence of electric-
ity, or even matter, a changing magnetic field, he proposed, elicits 
an electric field and vice versa. The equations were to represent 
Nature, and Nature is, Maxwell believed, beautiful and elegant. 
(There was also another, more technical reason for preserving the 
displacement current in a vacuum, which we pass over here.) This 
essentially aesthetic judgement by a nerdish physicist, entirely 
unknown except to a few other academic scientists, has done more 
to shape our civilization than any ten recent presidents and prime 
ministers. 
Briefly, the four Maxwell equations for a vacuum say (1) there 
are no electrical charges in a vacuum; (2) there are no magnetic 
monopoles in a vacuum; (3) a changing magnetic field generates 
364 
The fourth describes the converse - how a changing electric 
field (or an electrical current) induces a magnetic field. 
The four equations are essentially distillations of generations of 
laboratory experiments, mainly by French and British scientists. 
What I've described here vaguely and qualitatively, the equations 
describe exactly and quantitatively. 
Maxwell then asked himself a strange question: what would 
these equations look like in empty space, in a vacuum, in a place 
where there were no electrical charges and no electrical currents? 
We might very well anticipate no electric and no magnetic fields in 
a vacuum. Instead, he suggested that the right form of the 
Maxwell equations for the behaviour of electricity and magnetism 
in empty space is this: 
equation, 


Maxwell and The Nerds 
an electrical field; and (4) vice versa. 
When the equations were written down like this, Maxwell was 
readily able to show that E and B propagated through empty space 
as if they were waves. What's more, he could calculate the speed 
of the wave. It was just 1 divided by the square root of ε0 times μ0. 
But ε0 and μ0 had been measured in the laboratory. When you 
plugged in the numbers you found that the electric and magnetic 
fields in a vacuum ought to propagate, astonishingly, at the same 
speed as had already been measured for light. The agreement was 
too close to be accidental. Suddenly, disconcertingly, electricity 
and magnetism were deeply implicated in the nature of light. 
Since light now appeared to behave as waves and to derive from 
electric and magnetic fields, Maxwell called it electromagnetic. 
Those obscure experiments with batteries and wires had some­
thing to do with the brightness of the Sun, with how we see, with 
what light is. Ruminating on Maxwell's discovery many years 
later, Albert Einstein wrote, 'To few men in the world has such an 
experience been vouchsafed.' 
Maxwell himself was baffled by the results. The vacuum seemed 
to act like a dielectric. He said that it can be 'electrically 
polarized'. Living in a mechanical age, Maxwell felt obliged to 
offer some kind of mechanical model for the propagation of an 
electromagnetic wave through a perfect vacuum. So he imagined 
space filled with a mysterious substance he called the aether, 
which supported and contained the time­varying electric and 
magnetic fields ­ something like a throbbing but invisible Jell­O 
permeating the Universe. The quivering of the aether was the 
reason that light travelled through it ­ just as water waves 
propagate through water and sound waves through air. 
But it had to be very odd stuff, this ether, very thin, ghostly, 
almost incorporeal. The Sun and the Moon, the planets and the 
stars had to pass through it without being slowed down, without 
noticing. And yet it had to be stiff enough to support all these 
waves propagating at prodigious speed. 
The word 'aether' is still, in a desultory fashion, in use ­ in 
English mainly in the adjective ethereal, residing in the aether. It 
has some of the same connotations as the more modern 'spacy' or 
'spaced out'. When, in the early days of radio, they would say 'On 
365 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
the air', the aether is what they had in mind. (The Russian phrase 
is quite literally 'on the aether', v efir.) But of course radio readily 
travels through a vacuum, one of Maxwell's main results. It 
doesn't need air to propagate. The presence of air is, if anything, 
an impediment. 
The whole idea of light and matter moving through the aether 
was to lead in another forty years to Einstein's Special Theory of 
Relativity, E = mc
2, and a great deal else. Relativity, and 
experiments leading up to it, showed conclusively that there is no 
aether supporting the propagation of electromagnetic waves, as 
Einstein writes in the extract from his famous paper that I 
reproduced in Chapter 2. The wave goes by itself. The changing 
electric field generates a magnetic field; the changing magnetic 
field generates an electric field. They hold each other up, by their 
bootstraps. 
Many physicists were deeply troubled by the demise of the 
'luminiferous' ether. They had needed some mechanical model to 
make the whole notion of the propagation of light in a vacuum 
reasonable, plausible, understandable. But this is a crutch, a 
symptom of our difficulties in reconnoitring realms in which 
common sense no longer serves. The physicist Richard Feynman 
described it this way: 
Today, we understand better that what counts are the equa-
tions themselves and not the model used to get them. We may 
only question whether the equations are true or false. This is 
answered by doing experiments, and untold numbers of 
experiments have confirmed Maxwell's equations. If we take 
away the scaffolding he used to build it, we find that 
Maxwell's beautiful edifice stands on its own. 
But what are these time-varying electric and magnetic fields 
permeating all of space? What do 
and 
mean? 
We feel so 
much more comfortable with the idea of things touching and 
jiggling, pushing and pulling, rather than 'fields' magically moving 
objects at a distance, or mere mathematical abstractions. But, as 
Feynman pointed out, our sense that at least in everyday life we 
can rely on solid, sensible physical contact to explain, say, why the 
366 


Maxwell and The Nerds 
butter knife comes to you when you pick it up, is a misconception. 
What does it mean to have physical contact? What exactly is 
happening when you pick up a knife, or push a swing, or make a 
wave in a waterbed by pressing down on it periodically? When we 
investigate deeply, we find that there is no physical contact. 
Instead, the electrical charges on your hand are influencing the 
electrical charges on the knife or swing or waterbed, and vice 
versa. Despite everyday experience and common sense, even 
here, there is only the interaction of electric fields. Nothing is 
touching anything. 
No physicist started out impatient with common-sense notions, 
eager to replace them with some mathematical abstraction that 
could be understood only by rarified theoretical physics. Instead, 
they began, as we all do, with comfortable, standard, common-
sense notions. The trouble is that Nature does not comply. If we 
no longer insist on our notions of how Nature ought to behave, but 
instead stand before Nature with an open and receptive mind, we 
find that common sense often doesn't work. Why not? Because 
our notions, both hereditary and learned, of how Nature works 
were forged in the millions of years our ancestors were hunters 
and gatherers. In this case common sense is a faithless guide 
because no hunter-gatherer's life ever depended on understanding 
time-variable electric and magnetic fields. There were no evolu-
tionary penalties for ignorance of Maxwell's equations. In our 
time it's different. 
Maxwell's equations show that a rapidly varying electric field 
(making 
large) ought to generate electromagnetic waves. In 
1888 the German physicist Heinrich Hertz did the experiment and 
found that he had generated a new kind of radiation, radio waves. 
Seven years later, British scientists in Cambridge transmitted 
radio signals over a distance of a kilometre. By 1901, Guglielmo 
Marconi of Italy was using radio waves to communicate across the 
Atlantic Ocean. 
The linking-up of the modern world economically, culturally 
and politically by broadcast towers, microwave relays and commu-
nication satellites traces directly back to Maxwell's judgement to 
include the displacement current in his vacuum equations. So does 
television, which imperfectly instructs and entertains us; radar, 
367 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
which may have been the decisive element in the Battle of Britain 
and in the Nazi defeat in World War Two (which I like to think of 
as 'Dafty', the boy who didn't fit in, reaching into the future and 
saving the descendants of his tormentors); the control and naviga-
tion of airplanes, ships and spacecraft; radio astronomy and the 
search for extraterrestrial intelligence; and significant aspects of 
the electrical power and microelectronics industries. 
What's more, Faraday's and Maxwell's notion of fields has been 
enormously influential in understanding the atomic nucleus, quan-
tum mechanics, and the fine structure of matter. His unification of 
electricity, magnetism and light into one coherent mathematical 
whole is the inspiration for subsequent attempts - some success-
ful, some still in their rudimentary stages - to unify all aspects of 
the physical world, including gravity and nuclear forces, into one 
grand theory. Maxwell may fairly be said to have ushered in the 
age of modern physics. 
Our current view of the silent world of Maxwell's varying 
electric and magnetic vectors is described by Richard Feynman in 
these words: 
Try to imagine what the electric and magnetic fields look like 
at present in the space of this lecture room. First of all, there 
is a steady magnetic field; it comes from the currents in the 
interior of the earth - that is, the earth's steady magnetic 
field. Then there are some irregular, nearly static electric 
fields produced perhaps by electric charges generated by 
friction as various people move about in their chairs and rub 
their coat sleeves against the chair arms. Then there are other 
magnetic fields produced by oscillating currents in the electri-
cal wiring - fields which vary at a frequency of 60 cycles per 
second, in synchronism with the generator at Boulder Dam. 
But more interesting are the electric and magnetic fields 
varying at much higher frequencies. For instance, as light 
travels from window to floor and wall to wall, there are little 
wiggles of the electric and magnetic fields moving along at 
186,000 miles per second. Then there are also infrared waves 
travelling from the warm foreheads to the cold blackboard. 
And we have forgotten the ultraviolet light, the X-rays, and 
368 


Maxwell and The Nerds 
the radiowaves travelling through the room. 
Flying across the room are electromagnetic waves which 
carry music of a jazz band. There are waves modulated by a 
series of impulses representing pictures of events going on in 
other parts of the world, or of imaginary aspirins dissolving in 
imaginary stomachs. To demonstrate the reality of these 
waves it is only necessary to turn on electronic equipment 
that converts these waves into pictures and sounds. 
If we go into further detail to analyze even the smallest 
wiggles, there are tiny electromagnetic waves that have come 
into the room from enormous distances. There are now tiny 
oscillations of the electric field, whose crests are separated by 
a distance of one foot, that have come from millions of miles 
away, transmitted to the earth from the Mariner [2] space 
craft which has just passed Venus. Its signals carry summaries 
of information it has picked up about the planets (informa-
tion obtained from electromagnetic waves that travelled from 
the planet to the space craft). 
There are very tiny wiggles of the electric and magnetic 
fields that are waves which originated billions of light years 
away - from galaxies in the remotest corners of the universe. 
That this is true has been found by 'filling the room with 
wires' - by building antennas as large as this room. Such 
radiowaves have been detected from places in space beyond 
the range of the greatest optical telescopes. Even they, the 
optical telescopes, are simply gatherers of electromagnetic 
waves. What we call the stars are only inferences, inferences 
drawn from the only physical reality we have yet gotten from 
them - from a careful study of the unendingly complex 
undulations of the electric and magnetic fields reaching us on 
earth. 
There is, of course, more: the fields produced by lightning 
miles away, the fields of the charged cosmic ray particles as 
they zip through the room, and more, and more. What a 
complicated thing is the electric field in the space around you! 
If Queen Victoria had ever called an urgent meeting of her 
counsellors, and ordered them to invent the equivalent of radio 
369 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
and television, it is unlikely that any of them would have 
imagined the path to lead through the experiments of Ampere, 
Biot, Oersted and Faraday, four equations of vector calculus, 
and the judgement to preserve the displacement current in a 
vacuum. They would, I think, have gotten nowhere. Mean-
while, on his own, driven only by curiosity, costing the govern-
ment almost nothing, himself unaware that he was laying the 
ground for the Westminster Project, 'Dafty' was scribbling 
away. It's doubtful whether the self-effacing, unsociable Mr 
Maxwell would even have been thought of to perform such a 
study. If he had, probably the government would have been 
telling him what to think about and what not, impeding rather 
than inducing his great discovery. 
Late in life, Maxwell did have one interview with Queen 
Victoria. He worried about it beforehand - essentially about his 
ability to communicate science to a non-expert - but the Queen 
was distracted and the interview was short. Like the four other 
greatest British scientists of recent history, Michael Faraday, 
Charles Darwin, P.A.M. Dirac and Francis Crick, Maxwell was 
never knighted (although Lyell, Kelvin, J.J. Thomson, Ruther-
ford, Eddington and Hoyle in the next tier were). In Maxwell's 
case, there was not even the excuse that he might hold opinions at 
variance with the Church of England: he was an absolutely 
conventional Christian for his time, more devout than most. 
Maybe it was his nerdishness. 
The communications media - the instruments of education and 
entertainment that James Clerk Maxwell made possible - have 
never, so far as I know, offered even a mini-series on the life and 
thought of their benefactor and founder. By contrast, think of 
how difficult it is to grow up in America without television 
teaching you about, say, the life and times of Davy Crockett or 
Billy the Kid or Al Capone. 
Maxwell married young, but the bond seems to have been 
passionless as well as childless. His excitement was reserved for 
science. This founder of the modern age died in 1879 at the age of 
47. While he is almost forgotten in popular culture, radar astrono-
mers who map other worlds have remembered: the greatest 
mountain range on Venus, discovered by sending radio waves 
370 


Maxwell and The Nerds 
from Earth, bouncing them off Venus, and detecting the faint 
echoes, is named after him. 
Less than a century after Maxwell's prediction of radio waves, the 
first quest was initiated for signals from possible civilizations on 
planets of other stars. Since then there have been a number of 
searches, some of which I referred to earlier, for the time-varying 
electric and magnetic fields crossing the vast interstellar distances 
from possible other intelligences - biologically very different from 
us - who had also benefited sometime in their histories from the 
insights of local counterparts of James Clerk Maxwell. 
In October 1992, in the Mojave Desert, and in a Puerto Rican 
karst valley, we initiated by far the most promising, powerful and 
comprehensive search for extraterrestrial intelligence (SETI). For 
the first time NASA would organize and operate the programme. 
The entire sky would be examined over a ten-year period with 
unprecedented sensitivity and frequency range. If, on a planet of 
any of the 400 billion other stars that make up the Milky Way 
galaxy, anyone had been sending us a radio message, we might 
have had a pretty fair chance of hearing them. 
Just one year later, Congress pulled the plug. SETI was not of 
pressing importance; its interest was limited; it was too expensive. 
But every civilization in human history has devoted some of its 
resources to investigating deep questions about the Universe, and 
it's hard to think of a deeper one than whether we are alone. Even 
if we never decrypted the message contents, the receipt of such a 
signal would transform our view of the Universe and ourselves. 
And if we could understand the message from an advanced 
technical civilization, the practical benefits might be unprec-
edented. Far from being narrowly based, the SETI programme, 
strongly supported by the scientific community, is also embedded 
in popular culture. The fascination with this enterprise is broad 
and enduring, and for very good reason. And far from being too 
expensive, the programme would have cost about one attack 
helicopter per year. 
I wonder why those members of Congress concerned about 
price tags don't devote greater attention to the Department of 
Defense, which, with the Soviet Union gone and the Cold War 
371 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
over, still spends, when all costs are tallied, well over $300 billion 
a year. (And elsewhere in government there are many pro-
grammes that amount to welfare for the well-to-do.) Perhaps our 
descendants will look back on our time and marvel at us, 
possessed of the technology to detect other beings, but closing our 
ears because we insisted on spending the national wealth to 
protect us from an enemy that no longer exists.* 
David Goodstein, a physicist at Cal Tech, notes that science has 
been growing nearly exponentially for centuries and that it cannot 
continue such growth, because then everybody on the planet 
would have to be a scientist, and then the growth would have to 
stop. He speculates that for this reason, and not because of any 
fundamental disaffection from science, the growth in funding of 
science has slowed measurably in the last few decades. 
Nevertheless, I'm worried about how research funds are distrib-
uted. I'm worried that cancelling government funds for SETI is 
part of a trend. The government has been pressuring the National 
Science Foundation to move away from basic scientific research 
and to support technology, engineering, applications. Congress is 
suggesting doing away with the US Geological Survey, and 
slashing support for study of the Earth's fragile environment. 
NASA support for research and analysis of data already obtained 
is increasingly constrained. Many young scientists are not only 
unable to find grants to support their research; they are unable to 
find jobs. 
Industrial research and development funded by American com-
panies has slowed across the board in recent years. Government 
funding for research and development has declined in the same 
period. (Only military research and development increased in the 
decade of the 1980s.) In annual expenditures, Japan is now the 
world's leading investor in civilian research and development. In 
such fields as computers, telecommunications equipment, aero-
space, machine tools, robotics, and scientific precision equipment, 
the US share of global exports has been declining, while the 
Japanese share has been increasing. In that same period the 
* The SETI programme was briefly resurrected, using $7 million in private 
contributions, in 1995 under the appropriate name Project Phoenix. 
372 


Maxwell and The Nerds 
United States lost its lead to Japan in most semiconductor 
technologies. It experiences severe declines in market share in 
colour TVs, VCRs, phonographs, telephone sets and machine 
tools. 
Basic research is where scientists are free to pursue their 
curiosity and interrogate Nature, not with any short-term practical 
end in view, but to seek knowledge for its own sake. Scientists of 
course have a vested interest in basic research. It's what they like 
to do, in many cases why they became scientists in the first place. 
But it is in society's interest to support such research. This is how 
the major discoveries that benefit humanity are largely made. 
Whether a few grand and ambitious scientific projects are a better 
investment than a larger number of small programmes is a 
worthwhile question. 
We are rarely smart enough to set about on purpose making the 
discoveries that will drive our economy and safeguard our lives. 
Often, we lack the fundamental research. Instead, we pursue a 
broad range of investigations of Nature, and applications we never 
dreamed of emerge. Not always, of course. But often enough. 
Giving money to someone like Maxwell might have seemed the 
most absurd encouragement of mere 'curiosity-driven' science, 
and an imprudent judgement for practical legislators. Why grant 
money now, so nerdish scientists talking incomprehensible gibber-
ish can indulge their hobbies, when there are urgent unmet 
national needs? From this point of view it's easy to understand the 
contention that science is just another lobby, another pressure 
group anxious to keep the grant money rolling in so the scientists 
don't ever have to do a hard day's work or meet a payroll. 
Maxwell wasn't thinking of radio, radar and television when he 
first scratched out the fundamental equations of electromagnet-
ism; Newton wasn't dreaming of space flight or communications 
satellites when he first understood the motion of the Moon; 
Roentgen wasn't contemplating medical diagnosis when he inves-
tigated a penetrating radiation so mysterious he called it 'X-rays'; 
Curie wasn't thinking of cancer therapy when she painstakingly 
extracted minute amounts of radium from tons of pitchblende; 
Fleming wasn't planning on saving the lives of millions with 
antibiotics when he noticed a circle free of bacteria around a 
373 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
growth of mould; Watson and Crick weren't imagining the cure of 
genetic diseases when they puzzled over the X-ray diffractometry 
of DNA; Rowland and Molina weren't planning to implicate 
CFCs in ozone depletion when they began studying the role of 
halogens in stratospheric photochemistry. 
Members of Congress and other political leaders have from 
time to time found it irresistible to poke fun at seemingly 
obscure scientific research proposals that the government is 
asked to fund. Even as bright a senator as William Proxmire, a 
Harvard graduate, was given to making episodic 'Golden 
Fleece' awards, many commemorating ostensibly useless scien-
tific projects including SETI. I imagine the same spirit in 
previous governments - a Mr Fleming wishes to study bugs in 
smelly cheese; a Polish woman wishes to sift through tons of 
Central African ore to find minute quantities of a substance she 
says will glow in the dark; a Mr Kepler wants to hear the songs 
the planets sing. 
These discoveries and a multitude of others that grace and 
characterize our time, to some of which our very lives are 
beholden, were made ultimately by scientists given the opportu-
nity to explore what in their opinion, under the scrutiny of their 
peers, were basic questions in Nature. Industrial applications, in 
which Japan in the last two decades has done so well, are 
excellent. But applications of what? Fundamental research, 
research into the heart of Nature, is the means by which we 
acquire the new knowledge that gets applied. 
Scientists have an obligation, especially when asking for big 
money, to explain with great clarity and honesty what they're 
after. The Superconducting Supercollider (SSC) would have been 
the preeminent instrument on the planet for probing the fine 
structure of matter and the nature of the early Universe. Its price 
tag was $10 to $15 billion. It was cancelled by Congress in 1993 
after about $2 billion had been spent - a worst of both worlds 
outcome. But this debate was not, I think, mainly about declining 
interest in the support of science. Few in Congress understood 
what modern high energy accelerators are for. They are not for 
weapons. They have no practical applications. They are for 
something that is, worrisomely from the point of view of many, 
374 


Maxwell and The Nerds 
called 'the theory of everything'. Explanations that involve enti-
ties called quarks, charm, flavour, colour, etc. sound as if 
physicists are being cute. The whole thing has an aura, in the view 
of at least some Congresspeople I've talked to, of 'nerds gone 
wild' - which I suppose is an uncharitable way of describing 
curiosity-based science. No one asked to pay for this had the 
foggiest idea of what a Higgs boson is. I've read some of the 
material intended to justify the SSC. At the very end, some of it 
wasn't too bad, but there was nothing that really addressed what 
the project was about on a level accessible to bright but sceptical 
non-physicists. If physicists are asking for $10 or $15 billion to 
build a machine that has no practical value, at the very least they 
should make an extremely serious effort, with dazzling graphics, 
metaphors and capable use of the English language, to justify 
their proposal. More than financial mismanagement, budgetary 
constraints and political incompetence, I think this is the key to 
the failure of the SSC. 
There is a growing free-market view of human knowledge, 
according to which basic research should compete without govern-
ment support with all the other institutions and claimants in 
society. If they couldn't have relied on government support, and 
had to compete in the free-market economy of their day, it's 
unlikely that any of the scientists on my list would have been able 
to do their groundbreaking research. And the cost of basic 
research is substantially greater than it was in Maxwell's day -
both theoretical and, especially, experimental. 
But that aside, would free-market forces be adequate to support 
basic research? Only about ten per cent of meritorious research 
proposals in medicine are funded today. More money is spent on 
quack medicine than on all of medical research. What would it be 
like if government opted out of medical research? 
A necessary aspect of basic research is that its applications lie in 
the future, sometimes decades or even centuries ahead. What's 
more, no one knows which aspects of basic research will have 
practical value and which will not. If scientists cannot make such 
predictions, is it likely that politicians or industrialists can? If 
free-market forces are focused only towards short-term profit - as 
they certainly mainly are in an America with steep declines in 
375 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
corporate research - is not this solution tantamount to abandoning 
basic research? 
Cutting off fundamental, curiosity-driven science is like eating 
the seed corn. We may have a little more to eat next winter, but 
what will we plant so we and our children will have enough to get 
through the winters to come? 
Of course there are many pressing problems facing our nation 
and our species. But reducing basic scientific research is not the 
way to solve them. Scientists do not constitute a voting bloc. They 
have no effective lobby. However, much of their work is in 
everybody's interest. Backing off from fundamental research 
constitutes a failure of nerve, of imagination and of that vision 
thing that we still don't seem to have a handle on. It might strike 
one of those hypothetical extraterrestrials that we were planning 
not to have a future. 
Of course we need literacy, education, jobs, adequate medical 
care and defence, protection of the environment, security in our 
old age, a balanced budget, and a host of other matters. But we 
are a rich society. Can't we also nurture the Maxwells of our time? 
To take one symbolic example, is it really true that we can't afford 
one attack helicopter's worth of seed corn to listen to the stars? 
376 


24 
Science and Witchcraft* 
Ubi dubium ibi libertas: Where there is doubt, there is 
freedom. 
Latin proverb 
T
he 1939 New York World's Fair - that so transfixed me as a 
small visitor from darkest Brooklyn - was about 'The World 
of Tomorrow'. Merely by adopting such a motif, it promised that 
there would be a world of tomorrow, and the most casual glance 
affirmed that it would be better than the world of 1939. Although 
the nuance wholly passed me by, many people longed for such a 
reassurance on the eve of the most brutal and calamitous war in 
human history. I knew at least that I would be growing up in the 
future. The sleek and clean 'tomorrow' portrayed by the Fair was 
appealing and hopeful. And something called science was plainly 
the means by which that future would be realized. 
But if things had gone a little differently, the Fair could have 
given me enormously more. A fierce struggle had gone on behind 
the scenes. The vision that prevailed was that of the Fair's 
* Written with Ann Druyan. The following two chapters include more political 
content than elsewhere in this book. I do not wish to suggest that advocacy of 
science and scepticism necessarily leads to all the political or social conclusions 
I draw. Although sceptical thinking is invaluable in politics, politics is not a 
science. 
377 
