The Most Precious Thing 
wipers rhythmically thwacking, he told me he was glad I was 'that 
scientist guy' - he had so many questions to ask about science. 
Would I mind? 
No, I didn't mind. 
And so we got to talking. But not, as it turned out, about 
science. He wanted to talk about frozen extraterrestrials languish-
ing in an Air Force base near San Antonio, 'channelling' (a way to 
hear what's on the minds of dead people - not much, it turns out), 
crystals, the prophecies of Nostradamus, astrology, the shroud of 
Turin . . . He introduced each portentous subject with buoyant 
enthusiasm. Each time I had to disappoint him: 
'The evidence is crummy,' I kept saying. 'There's a much 
simpler explanation.' 
He was, in a way, widely read. He knew the various speculative 
nuances on, let's say, the 'sunken continents' of Atlantis and 
Lemuria. He had at his fingertips what underwater expeditions 
were supposedly just setting out to find the tumbled columns and 
broken minarets of a once-great civilization whose remains were 
now visited only by deep sea luminescent fish and giant kraken. 
Except . . . while the ocean keeps many secrets, I knew that there 
isn't a trace of oceanographic or geophysical support for Atlantis 
and Lemuria. As far as science can tell, they never existed. By 
now a little reluctantly, I told him so. 
As we drove through the rain, I could see him getting glummer 
and glummer. I was dismissing not just some errant doctrine, but a 
precious facet of his inner life. 
And yet there's so much in real science that's equally exciting, 
more mysterious, a greater intellectual challenge - as well as being 
a lot closer to the truth. Did he know about the molecular building 
blocks of life sitting out there in the cold, tenuous gas between the 
stars? Had he heard of the footprints of our ancestors found in 
4-million-year-old volcanic ash? What about the raising of the 
Himalayas when India went crashing into Asia? Or how viruses, 
built like hypodermic syringes, slip their DNA past the host 
organism's defences and subvert the reproductive machinery of 
cells; or the radio search for extraterrestrial intelligence; or the 
newly discovered ancient civilization of Ebla that advertised the 
virtues of Ebla beer? No, he hadn't heard. Nor did he know, even 
7 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
vaguely, about quantum indeterminacy, and he recognized DNA 
only as three frequently linked capital letters. 
Mr 'Buckley' - well-spoken, intelligent, curious - had heard 
virtually nothing of modern science. He had a natural appetite for 
the wonders of the Universe. He wanted to know about science. 
It's just that all the science had gotten filtered out before it 
reached him. Our cultural motifs, our educational system, our 
communications media had failed this man. What society permit-
ted to trickle through was mainly pretence and confusion. It had 
never taught him how to distinguish real science from the cheap 
imitation. He knew nothing about how science works. 
There are hundreds of books about Atlantis - the mythical 
continent that is said to have existed something like 10,000 years 
ago in the Atlantic Ocean. (Or somewhere. A recent book locates 
it in Antarctica.) The story goes back to Plato, who reported it as 
hearsay coming down to him from remote ages. Recent books 
authoritatively describe the high level of Atlantean technology, 
morals and spirituality, and the great tragedy of an entire popu-
lated continent sinking beneath the waves. There is a 'New Age' 
Atlantis, 'the legendary civilization of advanced sciences,' chiefly 
devoted to the 'science' of crystals. In a trilogy called Crystal 
Enlightenment by Katrina Raphaell - the books mainly responsi-
ble for the crystal craze in America - Atlantean crystals read 
minds, transmit thoughts, are the repositories of ancient history 
and the model and source of the pyramids of Egypt. Nothing 
approximating evidence is offered to support these assertions. (A 
resurgence of crystal mania may follow the recent finding by the 
real science of seismology that the inner core of the Earth may be 
composed of a single, huge, nearly perfect crystal - of iron.) 
A few books - Dorothy Vitaliano's Legends of the Earth, for 
example - sympathetically interpret the original Atlantis legends 
in terms of a small island in the Mediterranean that was destroyed 
by a volcanic eruption, or an ancient city that slid into the Gulf of 
Corinth after an earthquake. This, for all we know, may be the 
source of the legend, but it is a far cry from the destruction of a 
continent on which had sprung forth a preternaturally advanced 
technical and mystical civilization. 
What we almost never find - in public libraries or newsstand 
8 


The Most Precious Thing 
magazines or prime-time television programmes - is the evidence 
from sea floor spreading and plate tectonics, and from mapping 
the ocean floor which shows quite unmistakably that there could 
have been no continent between Europe and the Americas on 
anything like the timescale proposed. 
Spurious accounts that snare, the gullible are readily available. 
Sceptical treatments are much harder to find. Scepticism does not 
sell well. A bright and curious person who relies entirely on 
popular culture to be informed about something like Atlantis is 
hundreds or thousands of times more likely to come upon a fable 
treated uncritically than a sober and balanced assessment. 
Maybe Mr Buckley should know to be more sceptical about 
what's dished out to him by popular culture. But apart from that, 
it's hard to see how it's his fault. He simply accepted what the 
most widely available and accessible sources of information 
claimed was true. For his naivete, he was systematically misled 
and bamboozled. 
Science arouses a soaring sense of wonder. But so does pseudo-
science. Sparse and poor popularizations of science abandon 
ecological niches that pseudoscience promptly fills. If it were 
widely understood that claims to knowledge require adequate 
evidence before they can be accepted, there would be no room for 
pseudoscience. But a kind of Gresham's Law prevails in popular 
culture by which bad science drives out good. 
All over the world there are enormous numbers of smart, even 
gifted, people who harbour a passion for science. But that passion 
is unrequited. Surveys suggest that some 95 per cent of Americans 
are 'scientifically illiterate'. That's just the same fraction as those 
African Americans, almost all of them slaves, who were illiterate 
just before the Civil War - when severe penalties were in force for 
anyone who taught a slave to read. Of course there's a degree of 
arbitrariness about any determination of illiteracy, whether it 
applies to language or to science. But anything like 95 per cent 
illiteracy is extremely serious. 
Every generation worries that educational standards are decay-
ing. One of the oldest short essays in human history, dating from 
Sumer some 4,000 years ago, laments that the young are disas-
trously more ignorant than the generation immediately preceding. 
9 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
Twenty-four hundred years ago, the ageing and grumpy Plato, in 
Book VII of the Laws, gave his definition of scientific illiteracy: 
Who is unable to count one, two, three, or to distinguish odd 
from even numbers, or is unable to count at all, or reckon 
night and day, and who is totally unacquainted with the 
revolution of the Sun and Moon, and the other stars . . . All 
freemen, I conceive, should learn as much of these branches 
of knowledge as every child in Egypt is taught when he learns 
the alphabet. In that country arithmetical games have been 
invented for the use of mere children, which they learn as 
pleasure and amusement . . . I . . . have late in life heard 
with amazement of our ignorance in these matters; to me we 
appear to be more like pigs than men, and I am quite 
ashamed, not only of myself, but of all Greeks. 
I don't know to what extent ignorance of science and mathematics 
contributed to the decline of ancient Athens, but I know that the 
consequences of scientific illiteracy are far more dangerous in our 
time than in any that has come before. It's perilous and foolhardy 
for the average citizen to remain ignorant about global warming, 
say, or ozone depletion, air pollution, toxic and radioactive 
wastes, acid rain, topsoil erosion, tropical deforestation, exponen-
tial population growth. Jobs and wages depend on science and 
technology. If our nation can't manufacture, at high quality and 
low price, products people want to buy, then industries will 
continue to drift away and transfer a little more prosperity to 
other parts of the world. Consider the social ramifications of 
fission and fusion power, supercomputers, data 'highways', abor-
tion, radon, massive reductions in strategic weapons, addiction, 
government eavesdropping on the lives of its citizens, high-
resolution TV, airline and airport safety, foetal tissue transplants, 
health costs, food additives, drugs to ameliorate mania or depres-
sion or schizophrenia, animal rights, superconductivity, morning-
after pills, alleged hereditary antisocial predispositions, space 
stations, going to Mars, finding cures for AIDS and cancer. 
How can we affect national policy - or even make intelligent 
decisions in our own lives - if we don't grasp the underlying 
10 


The Most Precious Thing 
issues? As I write, Congress is dissolving its own Office of 
Technology Assessment - the only organization specifically tasked 
to provide advice to the House and Senate on science and 
technology. Its competence and integrity over the years have been 
exemplary. Of the 535 members of the US Congress, rarely in the 
twentieth century have as many as one per cent had any significant 
background in science. The last scientifically literate President 
may have been Thomas Jefferson.* 
So how do Americans decide these matters? How do they 
instruct their representatives? Who in fact makes these decisions, 
and on what basis? 
Hippocrates of Cos is the father of medicine. He is still remembered 
2,500 years later for the Hippocratic Oath (a modified form of which 
is still here and there taken by medical students upon their gradua-
tion). But he is chiefly celebrated because of his efforts to bring 
medicine out of the pall of superstition and into the light of science. 
In a typical passage Hippocrates wrote: 'Men think epilepsy divine, 
merely because they do not understand it. But if they called 
everything divine which they do not understand, why, there would 
be no end of divine things.' Instead of acknowledging that in many 
areas we are ignorant, we have tended to say things like the Universe 
is permeated with the ineffable. A God of the Gaps is assigned 
responsibility for what we do not yet understand. As knowledge of 
medicine improved since the fourth century BC, there was more and 
more that we understood and less and less that had to be attributed 
to divine intervention - either in the causes or in the treatment of 
disease. Deaths in childbirth and infant mortality have decreased, 
lifetimes have lengthened, and medicine has improved the quality of 
life for billions of us all over the planet. 
In the diagnosis of disease, Hippocrates introduced elements 
of the scientific method. He urged careful and meticulous 
* Although claims can be made for Theodore Roosevelt, Herbert Hoover and 
Jimmy Carter. Britain had such a Prime Minister in Margaret Thatcher. Her 
early studies in chemistry, in part under the tutelage of Nobel laureate Dorothy 
Hodgkin, were key to the UK's strong and successful advocacy that ozone-
depleting CFCs be banned worldwide. 
11 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
observation: 'Leave nothing to chance. Overlook nothing. 
Combine contradictory observations. Allow yourself enough 
time.' Before the invention of the thermometer, he charted the 
temperature curves of many diseases. He recommended that 
physicians be able to tell, from present symptoms alone, the 
probable past and future course of each illness. He stressed 
honesty. He was willing to admit the limitations of the physician's 
knowledge. He betrayed no embarrassment in confiding to poster-
ity that more than half his patients were killed by the diseases he 
was treating. His options of course were limited; the drugs 
available to him were chiefly laxatives, emetics and narcotics. 
Surgery was performed, and cauterization. Considerable further 
advances were made in classical times through to the fall of Rome. 
While medicine in the Islamic world flourished, what followed 
in Europe was truly a dark age. Much knowledge of anatomy and 
surgery was lost. Reliance on prayer and miraculous healing 
abounded. Secular physicians became extinct. Chants, potions, 
horoscopes and amulets were widely used. Dissections of cadavers 
were restricted or outlawed, so those who practised medicine were 
prevented from acquiring first-hand knowledge of the human 
body. Medical research came to a standstill. 
It was very like what the historian Edward Gibbon described for 
the entire Eastern Empire, whose capital was Constantinople: 
In the revolution of ten centuries, not a single discovery was 
made to exalt the dignity or promote the happiness of mankind. 
Not a single idea had been added to the speculative systems of 
antiquity, and a succession of patient disciples became in their 
turn the dogmatic teachers of the next servile generation. 
Even at its best, pre-modern medical practice did not save many. 
Queen Anne was the last Stuart monarch of Great Britain. In the last 
seventeen years of the seventeenth century, she was pregnant 
eighteen times. Only five children were born alive. Only one of them 
survived infancy. He died before reaching adulthood, and before her 
coronation in 1702. There seems to be no evidence of some genetic 
disorder. She had the best medical care money could buy. 
Diseases that once tragically carried off countless infants and 
12 


The Most Precious Thing 
children have been progressively mitigated and cured by science -
through the discovery of the microbial world, via the insight that 
physicians and midwives should wash their hands and sterilize 
their instruments, through nutrition, public health and sanitation 
measures, antibiotics, drugs, vaccines, the uncovering of the 
molecular structure of DNA, molecular biology, and now gene 
therapy. In the developed world at least, parents today have an 
enormously better chance of seeing their children live to adult-
hood than did the heir to the throne of one of the most powerful 
nations on Earth in the late seventeenth century. Smallpox has been 
wiped out worldwide. The area of our planet infested with malaria-
carrying mosquitoes has dramatically shrunk. The number of years a 
child diagnosed with leukaemia can expect to live has been increas-
ing progressively, year by year. Science permits the Earth to feed 
about a hundred times more humans, and under conditions much 
less grim, than it could a few thousand years ago. 
We can pray over the cholera victim, or we can give her 500 
milligrams of tetracycline every twelve hours. (There is still a 
religion, Christian Science, that denies the germ theory of disease; if 
prayer fails, the faithful would rather see their children die than give 
them antibiotics.) We can try nearly futile psychoanalytic talk 
therapy on the schizophrenic patient, or we can give him 300 to 500 
milligrams a day of chlozapine. The scientific treatments are hun-
dreds or thousands of times more effective than the alternatives. 
(And even when the alternatives seem to work, we don't actually 
know that they played any role: spontaneous remissions, even of 
cholera and schizophrenia, can occur without prayer and without 
psychoanalysis.) Abandoning science means abandoning much more 
than air conditioning, CD players, hair dryers and fast cars. 
In hunter-gatherer, pre-agricultural times, the human life 
expectancy was about 20 to 30 years. That's also what it was in 
Western Europe in Late Roman and in Medieval times. It didn't 
rise to 40 years until around the year 1870. It reached 50 in 1915, 
60 in 1930, 70 in 1955, and is today approaching 80 (a little more 
for women, a little less for men). The rest of the world is retracing 
the European increment in longevity. What is the cause of this 
stunning, unprecedented, humanitarian transition? The germ 
theory of disease, public health measures, medicines and medical 
13 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
technology. Longevity is perhaps the best single measure of the 
physical quality of life. (If you're dead, there's little you can do to 
be happy.) This is a precious offering from science to humanity -
nothing less than the gift of life. 
But micro-organisms mutate. New diseases spread like wildfire. 
There is a constant battle between microbial measures and human 
countermeasures. We keep pace in this competition not just by 
designing new drugs and treatments, but by penetrating progres-
sively more deeply toward an understanding of the nature of life -
basic research. 
If the world is to escape the direst consequences of global 
population growth and 10 or 12 billion people on the planet in the 
late twenty-first century, we must invent safe but more efficient 
means of growing food - with accompanying seed stocks, irrigation, 
fertilizers, pesticides, transportation and refrigeration systems. It will 
also take widely available and acceptable contraception, significant 
steps toward political equality of women, and improvements in the 
standards of living of the poorest people. How can all this be 
accomplished without science and technology? 
I know that science and technology are not just cornucopias 
pouring gifts out into the world. Scientists not only conceived 
nuclear weapons; they also took political leaders by the lapels, 
arguing that their nation - whichever it happened to be - had to 
have one first. Then they manufactured over 60,000 of them. 
During the Cold War, scientists in the United States, the Soviet 
Union, China and other nations were willing to expose their own 
fellow citizens to radiation - in most cases without their know-
ledge - to prepare for nuclear war. Physicians in Tuskegee, 
Alabama, misled a group of veterans into thinking they were 
receiving medical treatment for their syphilis, when they were the 
untreated controls. The atrocious cruelties of Nazi doctors are 
well-known. Our technology has produced thalidomide, CFCs, 
Agent Orange, nerve gas, pollution of air and water, species 
extinctions, and industries so powerful they can ruin the climate of 
the planet. Roughly half the scientists on Earth work at least 
part-time for the military. While a few scientists are still perceived 
as outsiders, courageously criticizing the ills of society and provid-
ing early warnings of potential technological catastrophes, many 
14 


The Most Precious Thing 
are seen as compliant opportunists, or as the willing source of 
corporate profits and weapons of mass destruction - never mind 
the long-term consequences. The technological perils that science 
serves up, its implicit challenge to received wisdom, and its 
perceived difficulty, are all reasons for some people to mistrust 
and avoid it. There's a reason people are nervous about science 
and technology. And so the image of the mad scientist haunts our 
world - down to the white-coated loonies of Saturday morning 
children's TV and the plethora of Faustian bargains in popular 
culture, from the eponymous Dr Faustus himself to Dr Franken-
stein, Dr Strangelove, and Jurassic Park. 
But we can't simply conclude that science puts too much power 
into the hands of morally feeble technologists or corrupt, power-
crazed politicians and so decide to get rid of it. Advances in 
medicine and agriculture have saved vastly more lives than have 
been lost in all the wars in history.* Advances in transportation, 
communication and entertainment have transformed and unified 
the world. In opinion poll after opinion poll science is rated 
among the most admired and trusted occupations, despite the 
misgivings. The sword of science is double-edged. Its awesome 
power forces on all of us, including politicians, a new responsibil-
ity - more attention to the long-term consequences of technology, 
a global and transgenerational perspective, an incentive to avoid 
easy appeals to nationalism and chauvinism. Mistakes are becoming 
too expensive. 
Do we care what's true? Does it matter? 
. . . where ignorance is bliss, 
'Tis folly to be wise 
wrote the poet Thomas Gray. But is it? Edmund Way Teale in his 
1950 book Circle of the Seasons understood the dilemma better: 
* At a large dinner party recently, I asked the assembled guests - ranging in age, 
I guess, from thirties to sixties - how many of them would be alive today if not 
for antibiotics, cardiac pacemakers, and the rest of the panoply of modern 
medicine. Only one hand went up. It was not mine. 
15 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
It is morally as bad not to care whether a thing is true or not, 
so long as it makes you feel good, as it is not to care how you 
got your money as long as you have got it. 
It's disheartening to discover government corruption and incom-
petence, for example; but it is better not to know about it? Whose 
interest does ignorance serve? If we humans bear, say, hereditary 
propensities toward the hatred of strangers, isn't self-knowledge 
the only antidote? If we long to believe that the stars rise and set 
for us, that we are the reason there is a Universe, does science do 
us a disservice in deflating our conceits? 
In The Genealogy of Morals, Friedrich Nietzsche, as so many 
before and after, decries the 'unbroken progress in the self-
belittling of man' brought about by the scientific revolution. 
Nietzsche mourns the loss of 'man's belief in his dignity, his 
uniqueness, his irreplaceability in the scheme of existence'. For 
me, it is far better to grasp the Universe as it really is than to 
persist in delusion, however satisfying and reassuring. Which 
attitude is better geared for our long-term survival? Which gives 
us more leverage on our future? And if our naive self-confidence 
is a little undermined in the process, is that altogether such a loss? 
Is there not cause to welcome it as a maturing and character-
building experience? 
To discover that the Universe is some 8 to 15 billion and not 6 to 
12 thousand years old* improves our appreciation of its sweep and 
grandeur; to entertain the notion that we are a particularly 
complex arrangement of atoms, and not some breath of divinity, 
at the very least enhances our respect for atoms; to discover, as 
now seems probable, that our planet is one of billions of other 
worlds in the Milky Way galaxy and that our galaxy is one of 
billions more, majestically expands the arena of what is possible; 
* 'No thinking religious person believes this. Old hat,' writes one of the referees 
of this book. But many 'scientific creationists' not only believe it, but are 
making increasingly aggressive and successful efforts to have it taught in the 
schools, museums, zoos, and textbooks. Why? Because adding up the 'begats', 
the ages of patriarchs and others in the Bible gives such a figure, and the Bible 
is 'inerrant'. 
16 


The Most Precious Thing 
to find that our ancestors were also the ancestors of apes ties us to 
the rest of life and makes possible important - if occasionally 
rueful - reflections on human nature. 
Plainly there is no way back. Like it or not, we are stuck with 
science. We had better make the best of it. When we finally come 
to terms with it and fully recognize its beauty and its power, we 
will find, in spiritual as well as in practical matters, that we have 
made a bargain strongly in our favour. 
But superstition and pseudoscience keep getting in the way, 
distracting all the 'Buckleys' among us, providing easy answers, 
dodging sceptical scrutiny, casually pressing our awe buttons and 
cheapening the experience, making us routine and comfortable 
practitioners as well as victims of credulity. Yes, the world would 
be a more interesting place if there were UFOs lurking in the deep 
waters off Bermuda and eating ships and planes, or if dead people 
could take control of our hands and write us messages. It would be 
fascinating if adolescents were able to make telephone handsets 
rocket off their cradles just by thinking at them, or if our dreams 
could, more often than can be explained by chance and our 
knowledge of the world, accurately foretell the future. 
These are all instances of pseudoscience. They purport to use 
the methods and findings of science, while in fact they are faithless 
to its nature - often because they are based on insufficient 
evidence or because they ignore clues that point the other way. 
They ripple with gullibility. With the uninformed cooperation 
(and often the cynical connivance) of newspapers, magazines, 
book publishers, radio, television, movie producers and the like, 
such ideas are easily and widely available. Far more difficult to 
come upon, as I was reminded by my encounter with Mr 'Buckley', 
are the alternative, more challenging and even more dazzling 
findings of science. 
Pseudoscience is easier to contrive than science, because dis-
tracting confrontations with reality - where we cannot control the 
outcome of the comparison - are more readily avoided. The 
standards of argument, what passes for evidence, are much more 
relaxed. In part for these same reasons, it is much easier to 
present pseudoscience to the general public than science. But this 
isn't enough to explain its popularity. 
17 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
Naturally people try various belief systems on for size, to see if 
they help. And if we're desperate enough, we become all too 
willing to abandon what may be perceived as the heavy burden of 
scepticism. Pseudoscience speaks to powerful emotional needs 
that science often leaves unfulfilled. It caters to fantasies about 
personal powers we lack and long for (like those attributed to 
comic book superheroes today, and earlier, to the gods). In some 
of its manifestations, it offers satisfaction of spiritual hungers, 
cures for disease, promises that death is not the end. It reassures 
us of our cosmic centrality and importance. It vouchsafes that we 
are hooked up with, tied to, the Universe.* Sometimes it's a kind 
of halfway house between old religion and new science, mistrusted 
by both. 
At the heart of some pseudoscience (and some religion also, 
New Age and Old) is the idea that wishing makes it so. How 
satisfying it would be, as in folklore and children's stories, to fulfil 
our heart's desire just by wishing. How seductive this notion is, 
especially when compared with the hard work and good luck 
usually required to achieve our hopes. The enchanted fish or the 
genie from the lamp will grant us three wishes - anything we want 
except more wishes. Who has not pondered - just to be on the safe 
side, just in case we ever come upon and accidentally rub an old, 
squat brass oil lamp - what to ask for? 
I remember, from childhood comic strips and books, a top-
hatted, moustachioed magician who brandished an ebony walking 
stick. His name was Zatara. He could make anything happen, 
anything at all. How did he do it? Easy. He uttered his commands 
backwards. So if he wanted a million dollars, he would say 'srallod 
noillim a em evig'. That's all there was to it. It was something like 
prayer, but much surer of results. 
I spent a lot of time at age eight experimenting in this vein, 
* Although it's hard for me to see a more profound cosmic connection than the 
astonishing findings of modern nuclear astrophysics: except for hydrogen, all 
the atoms that make each of us up - the iron in our blood, the calcium in our 
bones, the carbon in our brains - were manufactured in red giant stars 
thousands of light years away in space and billions of years ago in time. We are, 
as I like to say, starstuff. 
18 


The Most Precious Thing 
commanding stones to levitate: 'esir, enots.' It never worked. I 
blamed my pronunciation. 
Pseudoscience is embraced, it might be argued, in exact propor-
tion as real science is misunderstood - except that the language 
breaks down here. If you've never heard of science (to say nothing 
of how it works), you can hardly be aware you're embracing 
pseudoscience. You're simply thinking in one of the ways that 
humans always have. Religions are often the state-protected 
nurseries of pseudoscience, although there's no reason why reli-
gions have to play that role. In a way, it's an artefact from times 
long gone. In some countries nearly everyone believes in astrology 
and precognition, including government leaders. But this is not 
simply drummed into them by religion; it is drawn out of the 
enveloping culture in which everyone is comfortable with these 
practices, and affirming testimonials are everywhere. 
Most of the case histories I will relate in this book are 
American - because these are the cases I know best, not 
because pseudoscience and mysticism are more prominent in 
the United States than elsewhere. But the psychic spoonbender 
and extraterrestrial channeller Uri Geller hails from Israel. As 
tensions rise between Algerian secularists and Muslim funda-
mentalists, more and more people are discreetly consulting the 
country's 10,000 soothsayers and clairvoyants (about half of 
whom operate with a licence from the government). High 
French officials, including a former President of France, 
arranged for millions of dollars to be invested in a scam (the 
Elf-Aquitaine scandal) to find new petroleum reserves from 
the air. In Germany, there is concern about carcinogenic 'Earth 
rays' undetectable by science; they can be sensed only by 
experienced dowsers brandishing forked sticks. 'Psychic sur-
gery' flourishes in the Philippines. Ghosts are something of a 
national obsession in Britain. Since World War Two, Japan has 
spawned enormous numbers of new religions featuring the 
supernatural. An estimated 100,000 fortune-tellers flourish in 
Japan; the clientele are mainly young women. Aum Shinrikyo, 
a sect thought to be involved in the release of the nerve gas 
sarin in the Tokyo subway system in March 1995, features 
19 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
levitation, faith healing and ESP among its main tenets. 
Followers, at a high price, drank the 'miracle pond' water -
from the bath of Asahara, their leader. In Thailand, diseases 
are treated with pills manufactured from pulverized sacred 
Scripture. 'Witches' are today being burned in South Africa. 
Australian peace-keeping forces in Haiti rescue a woman tied 
to a tree; she is accused of flying from rooftop to rooftop, and 
sucking the blood of children. Astrology is rife in India, 
geomancy widespread in China. 
Perhaps the most successful recent global pseudoscience - by 
many criteria, already a religion - is the Hindu doctrine of 
transcendental meditation (TM). The soporific homilies of its 
founder and spiritual leader, the Maharishi Mahesh Yogi, can be 
seen on television in America. Seated in the yogi position, his 
white hair here and there flecked with black, surrounded by 
garlands and floral offerings, he has a look. One day while 
channel surfing we came upon this visage. 'You know who that 
is?' asked our four-year-old son. 'God.' The worldwide TM 
organization has an estimated valuation of $3 billion. For a fee 
they promise through meditation to be able to walk you through 
walls, to make you invisible, to enable you to fly. By thinking in 
unison they have, they say, diminished the crime rate in Washing-
ton DC and caused the collapse of the Soviet Union, among other 
secular miracles. Not one smattering of real evidence has been 
offered for any such claims. TM sells folk medicine, runs trading 
companies, medical clinics and 'research' universities, and has 
unsuccessfully entered politics. In its oddly charismatic leader, its 
promise of community, and the offer of magical powers in 
exchange for money and fervent belief, it is typical of many 
pseudosciences marketed for sacerdotal export. 
At each relinquishing of civil controls and scientific education, 
another little spurt in pseudoscience occurs. Leon Trotsky described 
it for Germany on the eve of the Hitler takeover (but in a description 
that might equally have applied to the Soviet Union of 1933): 
Not only in peasant homes, but also in city skyscrapers, there 
lives alongside the twentieth century the thirteenth. A hun-
dred million people use electricity and still believe in the 
20 


The Most Precious Thing 
magic powers of signs and exorcisms . . . Movie stars go to 
mediums. Aviators who pilot miraculous mechanisms created 
by man's genius wear amulets on their sweaters. What 
inexhaustible reserves they possess of darkness, ignorance 
and savagery! 
Russia is an instructive case. Under the Tsars, religious supersti-
tion was encouraged, but scientific and sceptical thinking - except 
by a few tame scientists - was ruthlessly expunged. Under 
Communism, both religion and pseudoscience were systematically 
suppressed - except for the superstition of the state ideological 
religion. It was advertised as scientific, but fell as far short of this 
ideal as the most unself-critical mystery cult. Critical thinking -
except by scientists in hermetically sealed compartments of know-
ledge - was recognized as dangerous, was not taught in the 
schools, and was punished where expressed. As a result, post-
Communism, many Russians view science with suspicion. When 
the lid was lifted, as was also true of virulent ethnic hatreds, what 
had all along been bubbling subsurface was exposed to view. The 
region is now awash in UFOs, poltergeists, faith healers, quack 
medicines, magic waters and old-time superstition. A stunning 
decline in life expectancy, increasing infant mortality, rampant 
epidemic disease, subminimal medical standards and ignorance of 
preventive medicine all work to raise the threshold at which 
scepticism is triggered in an increasingly desperate population. As 
I write, the electorally most popular member of the Duma, a 
leading supporter of the ultranationalist Vladimir Zhirinovsky, is 
one Anatoly Kashpirovsky - a faith healer who remotely cures 
diseases ranging from hernias to AIDS by glaring at you out of 
your television set. His face starts stopped clocks. 
A somewhat analogous situation exists in China. After the 
death of Mao Zedong and the gradual emergence of a market 
economy, UFOs, channelling and other examples of Western 
pseudoscience emerged, along with such ancient Chinese practices 
as ancestor worship, astrology and fortune telling - especially that 
version that involves throwing yarrow sticks and working through 
the hoary tetragrams of the I Ching. The government newspaper 
lamented that 'the superstition of feudal ideology is reviving in our 
21 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
countryside'. It was (and remains) a rural, not primarily an urban, 
affliction. 
Individuals with 'special powers' gained enormous follow-
ings. They could, they said, project Qi, the 'energy field of the 
Universe', out of their bodies to change the molecular structure 
of a chemical 2,000 kilometres away, to communicate with 
aliens, to cure diseases. Some patients died under the ministra-
tions of one of these 'masters of Qi Gong' who was arrested and 
convicted in 1993. Wang Hongcheng, an amateur chemist, 
claimed to have synthesized a liquid, small amounts of which, 
when added to water, would convert it to gasoline or the 
equivalent. For a time he was funded by the army and the secret 
police, but when his invention was found to be a scam he was 
arrested and imprisoned. Naturally the story spread that his 
misfortune resulted not from fraud, but from his unwillingness 
to reveal his 'secret formula' to the government. (Similar 
stories have circulated in America for decades, usually with the 
government role replaced by a major oil or auto company.) 
Asian rhinos are being driven to extinction because their horns, 
when pulverized, are said to prevent impotence; the market 
encompasses all of East Asia. 
The government of China and the Chinese Communist Party 
were alarmed by certain of these developments. On 5 December 
1994, they issued a joint proclamation that read in part: 
[P]ublic education in science has been withering in recent 
years. At the same time, activities of superstition and igno-
rance have been growing, and antiscience and pseudoscience 
cases have become frequent. Therefore, effective measures 
must be applied as soon as possible to strengthen public 
education in science. The level of public education in science 
and technology is an important sign of the national scientific 
accomplishment. It is a matter of overall importance in 
economic development, scientific advance, and the progress 
of society. We must be attentive and implement such public 
education as part of the strategy to modernize our socialist 
country and to make our nation powerful and prosperous. 
Ignorance is never socialist, nor is poverty. 
22 


The Most Precious Thing 
So pseudoscience in America is part of a global trend. Its causes, 
dangers, diagnosis and treatment are likely to be similar every-
where. Here, psychics ply their wares on extended television 
commercials, personally endorsed by entertainers. They have 
their own channel, the 'Psychic Friends Network'; a million 
people a year sign on and use such guidance in their everyday 
lives. For the chief executives of major corporations, for financial 
analysts, for lawyers and bankers there is a species of astrologer/ 
soothsayer/psychic ready to advise on any matter. 'If people knew 
how many people, especially the very rich and powerful ones, 
went to psychics, their jaws would drop through the floor,' says a 
psychic from Cleveland, Ohio. Royalty has traditionally been 
vulnerable to psychic frauds. In ancient China and Rome astrol-
ogy was the exclusive property of the emperor; any private use of 
this potent art was considered a capital offence. Emerging from a 
particularly credulous Southern California culture, Nancy and 
Ronald Reagan relied on an astrologer in private and public 
matters - unknown to the voting public. Some portion of the 
decision-making that influences the future of our civilization is 
plainly in the hands of charlatans. If anything, the practice is 
comparatively muted in America; its venue is worldwide. 
As amusing as some of pseudoscience may seem, as confident as 
we may be that we would never be so gullible as to be swept up by 
such a doctrine, we know it's happening all around us. Transcen-
dental meditation and Aum Shinrikyo seem to have attracted a 
large number of accomplished people, some with advanced 
degrees in physics or engineering. These are not doctrines for 
nitwits. Something else is going on. 
What's more, no one interested in what religions are and how 
they begin can ignore them. While vast barriers may seem to 
stretch between a local, single-focus contention of pseudoscience 
and something like a world religion, the partitions are very thin. 
The world presents us with nearly insurmountable problems. A 
wide variety of solutions are offered, some of very limited 
worldview, some of portentous sweep. In the usual Darwinian 
natural selection of doctrines, some thrive for a time, while most 
quickly vanish. But a few - sometimes, as history has shown, the 
23 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
most scruffy and least prepossessing among them - may have the 
power to change profoundly the history of the world. 
The continuum stretching from ill-practised science, pseudo-
science and superstition (New Age or Old), all the way to 
respectable mystery religion, based on revelation, is indistinct. I 
try not to use the word 'cult' in this book in its usual meaning of a 
religion the speaker dislikes, but try to reach for the headstone of 
knowledge - do they really know what they claim to know? 
Everyone, it turns out, has relevant expertise. 
In certain passages of this book I will be critical of the excesses 
of theology, because at the extremes it is difficult to distinguish 
pseudoscience from rigid, doctrinaire religion. Nevertheless, I 
want to acknowledge at the outset the prodigious diversity and 
complexity of religious thought and practice over the millennia; 
the growth of liberal religion and ecumenical fellowship during the 
last century; and the fact that - as in the Protestant Reformation, 
the rise of Reform Judaism, Vatican II, and the so-called higher 
criticism of the Bible - religion has fought (with varying degrees of 
success) its own excesses. But in parallel to the many scientists 
who seem reluctant to debate or even publicly discuss pseudo-
science, many proponents of mainstream religions are reluctant to 
take on extreme conservatives and fundamentalists. If the trend 
continues, eventually the field is theirs; they can win the debate by 
default. 
One religious leader writes to me of his longing for 'disciplined 
integrity' in religion: 
We have grown far too sentimental . . . Devotionalism and 
cheap psychology on one side, and arrogance and dogmatic 
intolerance on the other distort authentic religious life almost 
beyond recognition. Sometimes I come close to despair, but 
then I live tenaciously and always with hope . . . Honest 
religion, more familiar than its critics with the distortions and 
absurdities perpetrated in its name, has an active interest in 
encouraging a healthy skepticism for its own purposes . . . 
There is the possibility for religion and science to forge a 
potent partnership against pseudo-science. Strangely, I think 
it would soon be engaged also in opposing pseudo-religion. 


The Most Precious Thing 
Pseudoscience differs from erroneous science. Science thrives on 
errors, cutting them away one by one. False conclusions are drawn 
all the time, but they are drawn tentatively. Hypotheses are 
framed so they are capable of being disproved. A succession of 
alternative hypotheses is confronted by experiment and observa-
tion. Science gropes and staggers toward improved understand-
ing. Proprietary feelings are of course offended when a scientific 
hypothesis is disproved, but such disproofs are recognized as 
central to the scientific enterprise. 
Pseudoscience is just the opposite. Hypotheses are often framed 
precisely so they are invulnerable to any experiment that offers a 
prospect of disproof, so even in principle they cannot be invalidated. 
Practitioners are defensive and wary. Sceptical scrutiny is opposed. 
When the pseudoscientific hypothesis fails to catch fire with scien-
tists, conspiracies to suppress it are deduced. 
Motor ability in healthy people is almost perfect. We rarely 
stumble and fall, except in young and old age. We can learn tasks 
such as riding a bicycle or skating or skipping, jumping rope or 
driving a car, and retain that mastery for the rest of our lives. 
Even if we've gone a decade without doing it, it comes back to us 
effortlessly. The precision and retention of our motor skills may, 
however, give us a false sense of confidence in our other talents. 
Our perceptions are fallible. We sometimes see what isn't there. 
We are prey to optical illusions. Occasionally we hallucinate. We 
are error-prone. A most illuminating book called How We Know 
What Isn't So: The Fallibility of Human Reason in Everyday Life, 
by Thomas Gilovich, shows how people systematically err in 
understanding numbers, in rejecting unpleasant evidence, in being 
influenced by the opinions of others. We're good in some things, but 
not in everything. Wisdom lies in understanding our limitations. 'For 
Man is a giddy thing,' teaches William Shakespeare. That's where 
the stuffy sceptical rigour of science comes in. 
Perhaps the sharpest distinction between science and pseudo-
science is that science has a far keener appreciation of human 
imperfections and fallibility than does pseudoscience (or 'inerrant' 
revelation). If we resolutely refuse to acknowledge where we are 
liable to fall into error, then we can confidently expect that error -
even serious error, profound mistakes - will be our companion 
25 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
forever. But if we are capable of a little courageous self-
assessment, whatever rueful reflections they may engender, our 
chances improve enormously. 
If we teach only the findings and products of science - no matter 
how useful and even inspiring they may be - without communicat-
ing its critical method, how can the average person possibly 
distinguish science from pseudoscience? Both then are presented 
as unsupported assertion. In Russia and China, it used to be easy. 
Authoritative science was what the authorities taught. The distinc-
tion between science and pseudoscience was made for you. No 
perplexities needed to be muddled through. But when profound 
political changes occurred and strictures on free thought were 
loosened, a host of confident or charismatic claims - especially 
those that told us what we wanted to hear - gained a vast 
following. Every notion, however improbable, became authorita-
tive. 
It is a supreme challenge for the popularizer of science to make 
clear the actual, tortuous history of its great discoveries and the 
misapprehensions and occasional stubborn refusal by its practi-
tioners to change course. Many, perhaps most, science textbooks 
for budding scientists tread lightly here. It is enormously easier to 
present in an appealing way the wisdom distilled from centuries of 
patient and collective interrogation of Nature than to detail the 
messy distillation apparatus. The method of science, as stodgy and 
grumpy as it may seem, is far more important than the findings of 
science. 
26 


2 
Science and Hope 
Two men came to a hole in the sky. One asked the other to 
lift him up . . . But so beautiful was it in heaven that the 
man who looked in over the edge forgot everything, forgot 
his companion whom he had promised to help up and simply 
ran off into all the splendour of heaven. 
from an Iglulik Inuit prose poem, 
early twentieth century, told by Inugpasugjuk to 
Knud Rasmussen, the Greenlandic arctic explorer 
I
was a child in a time of hope. I wanted to be a scientist from my 
earliest school days. The crystallizing moment came when I first 
caught on that the stars are mighty suns, when it first dawned on me 
how staggeringly far away they must be to appear as mere points of 
light in the sky. I'm not sure I even knew the meaning of the word 
'science' then, but I wanted somehow to immerse myself in all that 
grandeur. I was gripped by the splendour of the Universe, transfixed 
by the prospect of understanding how things really work, of helping 
to uncover deep mysteries, of exploring new worlds - maybe even 
literally. It has been my good fortune to have had that dream in part 
fulfilled. For me, the romance of science remains as appealing and 
new as it was on that day, more than half a century ago, when I was 
shown the wonders of the 1939 World's Fair. 
Popularizing science - trying to make its methods and 
findings accessible to non-scientists - then follows naturally and 
27 
