THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
The American psychologist Charles Tart, who believes the 
evidence for extrasensory perception is convincing, writes: 
An important factor in the current popularity of 'New Age' 
ideas is a reaction against the dehumanizing, despiritualizing 
effects of scientism, the philosophical belief (masquerading as 
objective science and held with the emotional tenacity of 
born-again fundamentalism) that we are nothing but material 
beings. To unthinkingly embrace anything and everything 
labeled 'spiritual' or 'psychic' or 'New Age' is, of course, 
foolish, for many of these ideas are factually wrong, however 
noble or inspiring they are. On the other hand, this New Age 
interest is a legitimate recognition of some of the realities of 
human nature: People have always had and continue to have 
experiences that seem to be 'psychic' or 'spiritual'. 
But why should 'psychic' experiences challenge the idea that we 
are made of matter and nothing but? There is very little doubt 
that, in the everyday world, matter (and energy) exist. The 
evidence is all around us. In contrast, as I've mentioned earlier, 
the evidence for something non-material called 'spirit' or 'soul' is 
very much in doubt. Of course each of us has a rich internal life. 
Considering the stupendous complexity of matter, though, how 
could we possibly prove that our internal life is not wholly due to 
matter? Granted, there is much about human consciousness that 
we do not fully understand and cannot yet explain in terms of 
neurobiology. Humans have limitations, and no one knows this 
better than scientists. But a multitude of aspects of the natural 
world that were considered miraculous only a few generations ago 
are now thoroughly understood in terms of physics and chemistry. 
At least some of the mysteries of today will be comprehensively 
solved by our descendants. The fact that we cannot now produce a 
detailed understanding of, say, altered states of consciousness in 
terms of brain chemistry no more implies the existence of a 'spirit 
world' than a sunflower following the Sun in its course across the 
sky was evidence of a literal miracle before we knew about 
phototropism and plant hormones. 
And if the world does not in all respects correspond to our 
254 


Newton's Sleep 
wishes, is this the fault of science, or of those who would impose 
their wishes on the world? All the mammals - and many other 
animals as well - experience emotions: fear, lust, hope, pain, love, 
hate, the need to be led. Humans may brood about the future 
more, but there is nothing in our emotions unique to us. On the 
other hand, no other species does science as much or as well as 
we. How then can science be 'dehumanizing'? 
Still, it seems so unfair: some of us starve to death before we're 
out of infancy, while others - by an accident of birth - live out 
their lives in opulence and splendour. We can be born into an 
abusive family or a reviled ethnic group, or start out with some 
deformity; we go through life with the deck stacked against us, 
and then we die, and that's it? Nothing but a dreamless and 
endless sleep? Where's the justice in this? This is stark and brutal 
and heartless. Shouldn't we have a second chance on a level 
playing field? How much better if we were born again in circum-
stances that took account of how well we played our part in the 
last life, no matter how stacked against us the deck was then. Or if 
there were a time of judgement after we die, then - so long as we 
did well with the persona we were given in this life, and were 
humble and faithful and all the rest - we should be rewarded by 
living joyfully until the end of time in a permanent refuge from the 
agony and turmoil of the world. That's how it would be if the 
world were thought out, preplanned, fair. That's how it would be 
if those suffering from pain and torment were to receive the 
consolation they deserve. 
So societies that teach contentment with our present station 
in life, in expectation of post mortem reward, tend to inoculate 
themselves against revolution. Further, fear of death, which in 
some respects is adaptive in the evolutionary struggle for 
existence, is maladaptive in warfare. Those cultures that teach 
an afterlife of bliss for heroes - or even for those who just did 
what those in authority told them - might gain a competitive 
advantage. 
Thus, the idea of a spiritual part of our nature that survives 
death, the notion of an afterlife, ought to be easy for religions and 
nations to sell. This is not an issue on which we might anticipate 
widespread scepticism. People will want to believe it, even if the 
255 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
evidence is meagre to nil. True, brain lesions can make us lose 
major segments of our memory, or convert us from manic to 
placid, or vice versa; and changes in brain chemistry can convince 
us there's a massive conspiracy against us, or make us think we 
hear the Voice of God. But as compelling testimony as this 
provides that our personality, character, memory - if you will, 
soul - resides in the matter of the brain, it is easy not to focus on 
it, to find ways to evade the weight of the evidence. 
And if there are powerful social institutions insisting that there 
is an afterlife, it should be no surprise that dissenters tend to be 
sparse, quiet and resented. Some Eastern, Christian and New Age 
religions, as well as Platonism, hold that the world is unreal, that 
suffering, death and matter itself are illusions; and that nothing 
really exists except 'Mind'. In contrast, the prevailing scientific 
view is that the mind is how we perceive what the brain does; i.e., 
it's a property of the hundred trillion neural connections in the 
brain. 
There is a strangely waxing academic opinion, with roots in the 
1960s, that holds all views to be equally arbitrary and 'true' or 
'false' to be a delusion. Perhaps it is an attempt to turn the tables 
on scientists who have long argued that literary criticism, religion, 
aesthetics, and much of philosophy and ethics are mere subjective 
opinion, because they cannot be demonstrated like a theorem in 
Euclidean geometry nor put to experimental test. 
There are people who want everything to be possible, to have 
their reality unconstrained. Our imagination and our needs 
require more, they feel, than the comparatively little that science 
teaches we may be reasonably sure of. Many New Age gurus - the 
actress Shirley MacLaine among them - go so far as to embrace 
solipsism, to assert that the only reality is their own thoughts. 'I 
am God,' they actually say. 'I really think we are creating our own 
reality,' MacLaine once told a sceptic. 'I think I'm creating you 
right here.' 
If I dream of being reunited with a dead parent or child, who is 
to tell me that it didn't really happen? If I have a vision of myself 
floating in space looking down on the Earth, maybe I was really 
there; who are some scientists, who didn't even share the experi-
ence, to tell me that it's all in my head? If my religion teaches that 
256 


Newton's Sleep 
it is the inalterable and inerrant word of God that the Universe is a 
few thousand years old, then scientists are being offensive and 
impious, as well as mistaken, when they claim it's a few billion. 
Irritatingly, science claims to set limits on what we can do, even 
in principle. Who says we can't travel faster than light? They used 
to say that about sound, didn't they? Who's going to stop us, if we 
have really powerful instruments, from measuring the position 
and the momentum of an electron simultaneously? Why can't we, 
if we're very clever, build a perpetual motion machine 'of the first 
kind' (one that generates more energy than is supplied to it), or a 
perpetual motion machine 'of the second kind' (one that never 
runs down)? Who dares to set limits on human ingenuity? 
In fact, Nature does. In fact, a fairly comprehensive and very 
brief statement of the laws of Nature, of how the Universe works, 
is contained in just such a list of prohibited acts. Tellingly, 
pseudoscience and superstition tend to recognize no constraints in 
Nature. Instead, 'all things are possible'. They promise a limitless 
production budget, however often their adherents have been 
disappointed and betrayed. 
A related complaint is that science is too simple-minded, too 
'reductionist'; it naively imagines that in the final accounting there 
will be only a few laws of Nature - perhaps even rather simple 
ones - that explain everything, that the exquisite subtlety of the 
world, all the snow crystals, spiderweb latticework, spiral galax-
ies, and flashes of human insight can ultimately be 'reduced' to 
such laws. Reductionism seems to pay insufficient respect to the 
complexity of the Universe. It appears to some as a curious hybrid 
of arrogance and intellectual laziness. 
To Isaac Newton - who in the minds of critics of science 
personifies 'single vision' - it looked like a clockwork Universe. 
Literally. The regular, predictable orbital motions of the planets 
around the Sun, or the Moon around the Earth, were described to 
high precision by essentially the same differential equation that 
predicts the swing of a pendulum or the oscillation of a spring. We 
have a tendency today to think we occupy some exalted vantage 
point, and to pity the poor Newtonians for having so limited a 
world view. But within certain reasonable limitations, the same 
257 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
harmonic equations that describe clockwork really do describe the 
motions of astronomical objects throughout the Universe. This is 
a profound, not a trivial parallelism. 
Of course, there are no gears in the solar system, and the 
component parts of the gravitational clockwork do not touch. 
Planets generally have more complicated motions than pendulums 
and springs. Also, the clockwork model breaks down in certain 
circumstances: over very long periods of time, the gravitational 
tugs of distant worlds - tugs that might seem wholly insignificant 
over a few orbits - can build up, and some little world can go 
unexpectedly careening out of its accustomed course. However, 
something like chaotic motion is also known in pendulum clocks; 
if we displace the bob too far from the perpendicular, a wild and 
ugly motion ensues. But the solar system keeps better time than 
any mechanical clock, and the whole idea of keeping time comes 
from the observed motion of the Sun and stars. 
The astonishing fact is that similar mathematics applies so well 
to planets and to clocks. It needn't have been this way. We didn't 
impose it on the Universe. That's the way the Universe is. If this is 
reductionism, so be it. 
Until the middle twentieth century, there had been a strong 
belief - among theologians, philosophers and many biologists -
that life was not 'reducible' to the laws of physics and chemistry, 
that there was a 'vital force', an 'entelechy', a tao, a mana that 
made living things go. It 'animated' life. It was impossible to see 
how mere atoms and molecules could account for the intricacy and 
elegance, the fitting of form to function, of a living thing. The 
world's religions were invoked: God or the gods breathed life, 
soul-stuff, into inanimate matter. The eighteenth-century chemist 
Joseph Priestley tried to find the 'vital force'. He weighed a mouse 
just before and just after it died. It weighed the same. All such 
attempts have failed. If there is soul-stuff, evidently it weighs 
nothing, that is, it is not made of matter. 
Nevertheless, even biological materialists entertained reserva-
tions; perhaps, if not plant, animal, fungal and microbial souls, 
some still undiscovered principle of science was needed to under-
stand life. For example, the British physiologist J.S. Haldane 
(father of J.B.S. Haldane) asked in 1932: 
258 


Newton's Sleep 
What intelligible account can the mechanistic theory of life 
give of the . . . recovery from disease and injuries? Simply 
none at all, except that these phenomena are so complex and 
strange that as yet we cannot understand them. It is exactly 
the same with the closely related phenomena of reproduc-
tion. We cannot by any stretch of the imagination conceive a 
delicate and complex mechanism which is capable, like a 
living organism, of reproducing itself indefinitely often. 
But only a few decades later and our knowledge of immunology 
and molecular biology have enormously clarified these once 
impenetrable mysteries. 
I remember very well when the molecular structure of DNA 
and the nature of the genetic code were first elucidated in the 
1950s and 1960s, how biologists who studied whole organisms 
accused the new proponents of molecular biology of reductionism. 
('They'll never understand even a worm with their DNA.') Of 
course reducing everything to a 'vital force' is no less reduction-
ism. But it is now clear that all life on Earth, every single living 
thing, has its genetic information encoded in its nucleic acids and 
employs fundamentally the same codebook to implement the 
hereditary instructions. We have learned how to read the code. 
The same few dozen organic molecules are used over and over 
again in biology for the widest variety of functions. Genes bearing 
significant responsibility for cystic fibrosis and breast cancer have 
been identified. The 1.8 million rungs of the DNA ladder of the 
bacterium Haemophilis influenzae, comprising its 1,743 genes, 
have been sequenced. The specific function of most of these genes 
is beautifully detailed - from the manufacture and folding of 
hundreds of complex molecules, to protection against heat and 
antibiotics, to increasing the mutation rate, to making identical 
copies of the bacterium. Much of the genomes of many other 
organisms (including the roundworm Caenorhabditis elegans) 
have now been mapped. Molecular biologists are busily recording 
the sequence of the three billion nucleotides that specify how to 
make a human being. In another decade or two, they'll be done. 
(Whether the benefits will ultimately exceed the risks seems by no 
means certain.) 
259 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
The continuity between atomic physics, molecular chemistry, 
and that holy of holies, the nature of reproduction and heredity, 
has now been established. No new principle of science need be 
invoked. It looks as if there are a small number of simple facts that 
can be used to understand the enormous intricacy and variety of 
living things. (Molecular genetics also teaches that each organism 
has its own particularity.) 
Reductionism is even better established in physics and chemis-
try. I will later describe the unexpected coalescence of our 
understanding of electricity, magnetism, light and relativity into a 
single framework. We've known for centuries that a handful of 
comparatively simple laws not only explains but quantitatively and 
accurately predicts a breathtaking variety of phenomena, not just 
on Earth but through the entire Universe. 
We hear - for example from the theologian Langdon Gilkey in 
his Nature, Reality and the Sacred - that the notion of the laws of 
Nature being everywhere the same is simply a preconception 
imposed on the Universe by fallible scientists and their social 
milieu. He longs for other kinds of 'knowledge', as valid in their 
contexts as science is in its. But the order of the Universe is not an 
assumption; it's an observed fact. We detect the light from distant 
quasars only because the laws of electromagnetism are the same 
ten billion light years away as here. The spectra of those quasars 
are recognizable only because the same chemical elements are 
present there as here, and because the same laws of quantum 
mechanics apply. The motion of galaxies around one another 
follows familiar Newtonian gravity. Gravitational lenses and 
binary pulsar spin-downs reveal general relativity in the depths of 
space. We could have lived in a Universe with different laws in 
every province, but we do not. This fact cannot but elicit feelings 
of reverence and awe. 
We might have lived in a Universe in which nothing could be 
understood by a few simple laws, in which Nature was complex 
beyond our abilities to understand, in which laws that apply on 
Earth are invalid on Mars, or in a distant quasar. But the evidence 
- not the preconceptions, the evidence - proves otherwise. 
Luckily for us, we live in a Universe in which much can be 
'reduced' to a small number of comparatively simple laws of 
260 


Newton's Sleep 
Nature. Otherwise we might have lacked the intellectual capacity 
and grasp to comprehend the world. 
Of course, we may make mistakes in applying a reductionist 
programme to science. There may be aspects which, for all we 
know, are not reducible to a few comparatively simple laws. But 
in the light of the findings in the last few centuries, it seems foolish 
to complain about reductionism. It is not a deficiency but one of 
the chief triumphs of science. And, it seems to me, its findings are 
perfectly consonant with many religions (although it does not 
prove their validity). Why should a few simple laws of Nature 
explain so much and hold sway throughout this vast Universe? 
Isn't this just what you might expect from a Creator of the 
Universe? Why should some religious people oppose the reduc-
tionist programme in science, except out of some misplaced love 
of mysticism? 
Attempts to reconcile religion and science have been on the religious 
agenda for centuries - at least for those who did not insist on Biblical 
and Qu'ranic literalism with no room for allegory or metaphor. 
The crowning achievements of Roman Catholic theology are the 
Summa Theologica and the Summa Contra Gentiles ('Against the 
Gentiles') of St Thomas Aquinas. Out of the maelstrom of sophisti-
cated Islamic philosophy that tumbled into Christendom in the 
twelfth and thirteenth centuries were the books of the ancient 
Greeks, especially Aristotle, works even on casual inspection of high 
accomplishment. Was this ancient learning compatible with God's 
Holy Word?* In the Summa Theologica, Aquinas set himself the task 
of reconciling 631 questions between Christian and classical sources. 
But how to do this where a clear dispute arises? It cannot be 
accomplished without some supervening organizing principle, some 
superior way to know the world. Often, Aquinas appealed to 
common sense and the natural world, i.e., science used as an 
error-correcting device. With some contortion of both common 
sense and Nature, he managed to reconcile all 631 problems. 
(Although when push came to shove, the desired answer was simply 
* This was no dilemma for many others. 'I believe; therefore I understand' said 
St Anselm in the eleventh century. 
261 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
assumed. Faith always got the nod over Reason.) Similar attempts at 
reconciliation permeate Talmudic and post-Talmudic Jewish litera-
ture and medieval Islamic philosophy. 
But tenets at the heart of religion can be tested scientifically. 
This in itself makes some religious bureaucrats and believers 
wary of science. Is the Eucharist, as the Church teaches, in fact 
and not just as productive metaphor, the flesh of Jesus Christ, 
or is it, chemically, microscopically and in other ways, just a 
wafer handed to you by a priest?* Will the world be destroyed 
at the end of the 52-year Venus cycle unless humans are 
sacrificed to the g o d s ?
† Does the occasional uncircumcised 
Jewish man fare worse than his co-religionists who abide by the 
ancient covenant in which God demands a piece of foreskin 
from every male worshipper? Are there humans populating 
innumerable other planets, as the Latter Day Saints teach? 
Were whites created from blacks by a mad scientist, as the 
Nation of Islam asserts? Would the Sun indeed not rise if the 
Hindu sacrificial rite is omitted (as we are assured would be the 
case in the Satapatha Brahmana)? 
We can gain some insight into the human roots of prayer by 
examining those of unfamiliar religions and cultures. Here, for 
example, is what is written in a cuneiform inscription on a 
Babylonian cylinder seal from the Second Millennium BC: 
Oh, Ninlil, Lady of the Lands, in your marriage bed, in the 
abode of your delight, intercede for me with Enlil, your 
beloved. [Signed] Mili-Shipak, Shatammu of Ninmah. 
* There was a time when the answer to this question was a matter of life or death. 
Miles Phillips was an English sailor, stranded in Spanish Mexico. He and his 
fellows were brought up before the Inquisition in the year 1574. They were 
asked 'Whether we did not believe that the Host of bread which the priest did 
hold up over his head, and the wine that was in the chalice, was the very true 
and perfect body and blood of our Saviour Christ, Yea or No? To which,' 
Phillips adds, 'if we answered not "Yea!" then there was no way but death.' 
† Since this Mesoamerican ritual has not really been practised for five centuries, 
we have the perspective to reflect on the tens of thousands of willing and 
unwilling sacrifices to the Aztec and Mayan gods who reconciled themselves to 
their fates with the confident faith that they were dying to save the Universe. 
262 


Newton's Sleep 
It's been a long time since there's been a Shatammu in Ninmah, or 
even a Ninmah. Despite the fact that Enlil and Ninlil were major 
gods - people all over the civilized western world had prayed to 
them for two thousand years - was poor Mili-Shipak in fact 
praying to a phantom, to a societally condoned product of his 
imagination? And if so, what about us? Or is this blasphemy, a 
forbidden question, as doubtless it was among the worshippers of 
Enlil? 
Does prayer work at all? Which ones? 
There's a category of prayer in which God is begged to 
intervene in human history or just to right some real or imagined 
injustice or natural calamity - for example, when a bishop from 
the American West prays for God to intervene and end a 
devastating dry spell. Why is the prayer needed? Didn't God 
know of the drought? Was he unaware that it threatened the 
bishop's parishioners? What is implied here about the limitations 
of a supposedly omnipotent and omniscient deity? The bishop 
asked his followers to pray as well. Is God more likely to intervene 
when many pray for mercy or justice than when only a few do? Or 
consider the following request, printed in 1994 in The Prayer and 
Action 
Weekly 
News: 
Iowa's 
Weekly 
Christian 
Information 
Source: 
Can you join me in praying that God will burn down the 
Planned Parenthood in Des Moines in a manner no one can 
mistake for any human torching, which impartial investiga-
tors will have to attribute to miraculous (unexplainable) 
causes, and which Christians will have to attribute to the 
Hand of God? 
We've discussed faith-healing. What about longevity through 
prayer? The Victorian statistician Francis Galton argued that, 
other things being equal, British monarchs ought to be very 
long-lived, because millions of people all over the world daily 
intoned the heartfelt mantra 'God Save the Queen' (or King). 
Yet, he showed, if anything, they don't live as long as other 
members of the wealthy and pampered aristocratic class. Tens of 
millions of people in concert publicly wished (although they did 
263 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
not exactly pray) that Mao Zedong would live 'for ten thousand 
years'. Nearly everyone in ancient Egypt exhorted the gods to let 
the Pharaoh live 'forever'. These collective prayers failed. Their 
failure constitutes data. 
By making pronouncements that are, even if only in principle, 
testable, religions, however unwillingly, enter the arena of sci-
ence. Religions can no longer make unchallenged assertions about 
reality so long as they do not seize secular power, provided they 
cannot coerce belief. 
This, in turn, has infuriated some followers of some religions. 
Occasionally they threaten sceptics with the direst imaginable 
penalties. Consider the following high stakes alternative by Wil-
liam Blake in his innocuously titled Auguries of Innocence: 
He who shall teach the Child to Doubt 
The rotting Grave shall ne'er get out. 
He who respects the Infant's Faith 
Triumphs over Hell & Death 
Of course many religions, devoted to reverence, awe, ethics, 
ritual, community, family, charity, and political and economic 
justice, are in no way challenged, but rather uplifted, by the 
findings of science. There is no necessary conflict between science 
and religion. On one level, they share similar and consonant roles, 
and each needs the other. Open and vigorous debate, even the 
consecration of doubt, is a Christian tradition going back to John 
Milton's Areopagitica (1644). Some of mainstream Christianity 
and Judaism embraces and even anticipated at least a portion of 
the humility, self-criticism, reasoned debate, and questioning of 
received wisdom that the best of science offers. But other sects, 
sometimes called conservative or fundamentalist - and today they 
seem to be in the ascendant, with the mainstream religions almost 
inaudible and invisible - have chosen to make a stand on matters 
subject to disproof, and thus have something to fear from science. 
The religious traditions are often so rich and multivariate that 
they offer ample opportunity for renewal and revision, again 
especially when their sacred books can be interpreted metaphori-
cally and allegorically. There is thus a middle ground of confessing 
264 


Newton's Sleep 
past errors, as the Roman Catholic Church did in its 1992 
acknowledgement that Galileo was right after all, that the Earth 
does revolve around the Sun: three centuries late, but courageous 
and most welcome none the less. Modern Roman Catholicism has 
no quarrel with the Big Bang, with a Universe 15 billion or so 
years old, with the first living things arising from prebiological 
molecules, or with humans evolving from ape-like ancestors -
although it has special opinions on 'ensoulment'. Most main-
stream Protestant and Jewish faiths take the same sturdy position. 
In theological discussion with religious leaders, I often ask what 
their response would be if a central tenet of their faith were 
disproved by science. When I put this question to the current, 
Fourteenth, Dalai Lama, he unhesitatingly replied as no conserva-
tive or fundamentalist religious leaders do: in such a case, he said, 
Tibetan Buddhism would have to change. 
Even, I asked, if it's a really central tenet, like (I searched for an 
example) reincarnation? 
Even then, he answered. 
However, he added with a twinkle, it's going to be hard to 
disprove reincarnation. 
Plainly, the Dalai Lama is right. Religious doctrine that is 
insulated from disproof has little reason to worry about the 
advance of science. The grand idea, common to many faiths, of a 
Creator of the Universe is one such doctrine - difficult alike to 
demonstrate or to dismiss. 
Moses Maimonides, in his Guide for the Perplexed, held that 
God could be truly known only if there were free and open study 
of both physics and theology [I, 55]. What would happen if science 
demonstrated an infinitely old Universe? Then theology would 
have to be seriously revamped [II, 25]. Indeed, this is the one 
conceivable finding of science that could disprove a Creator -
because an infinitely old universe would never have been created. 
It would have always been here. 
There are other doctrines, interests and concerns that also 
worry about what science will find out. Perhaps, they suggest, it's 
better not to know. If men and women turn out to have different 
hereditary propensities, won't this be used as an excuse for the 
former to suppress the latter? If there's a genetic component of 
265 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
violence, might this justify repression of one ethnic group by 
another, or even precautionary incarceration? If mental illness is 
just brain chemistry, doesn't this unravel our efforts to keep a 
grasp on reality or to be responsible for our actions? If we are not 
the special handiwork of the Creator of the Universe, if our basic 
moral laws are merely invented by fallible lawgivers, isn't our 
struggle to maintain an orderly society undermined? 
I suggest that in every one of these cases, religious or secular, 
we are much better off if we know the best available approxima-
tion to the truth, and if we keep before us a keen apprehension of 
the errors our interest group or belief system has committed in the 
past. In every case the imagined dire consequences of the truth 
being generally known are exaggerated. And again, we are not 
wise enough to know which lies, or even which shadings of the 
facts, can competently serve some higher social purpose, espe-
cially in the long run. 
266 


16 
When Scientists Know Sin 
The mind of man - how far will it advance? Where will its 
daring impudence find limits? If human villainy and human 
life shall wax in due proportion, if the son shall always grow 
in wickedness past his father, the gods must add another 
world to this that all the sinners may have space enough. 
Euripides, 
Hippolytus (428 BC) 
I
n a post-war meeting with President Harry S Truman, J. Robert 
Oppenheimer - the scientific director of the Manhattan nuclear 
weapons project - mournfully commented that scientists had bloody 
hands; they had now known sin. Afterwards, Truman instructed his 
aides that he never wished to see Oppenheimer again. Sometimes 
scientists are castigated for doing evil, and sometimes for warning 
about the evil uses to which science may be put. 
More often, science is taken to task because it and its 
products are said to be morally neutral, ethically ambiguous, as 
readily employed in the service of evil as of good. This is an old 
indictment. It goes back probably to the flaking of stone tools 
and the domestication of fire. Since technology has been with 
our ancestral line from before the first human, since we are a 
technological species, this problem is not so much one of 
science as of human nature. By this I don't mean that science 
has no responsibility for the misuse of its findings. It has 
267 
