THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
profound responsibility, and the more powerful its products the 
greater its responsibility. 
Like assault weapons and market derivatives, the technologies 
that allow us to alter the global environment that sustains us 
should mandate caution and prudence. Yes, it's the same old 
humans who have made it so far. Yes, we're developing new 
technologies as we always have. But when the weaknesses we've 
always had join forces with a capacity to do harm on an unprec-
edented planetary scale, something more is required of us - an 
emerging ethic that also must be established on an unprecedented 
planetary scale. 
Sometimes scientists try to have it both ways: to take credit for 
those applications of science that enrich our lives, but to distance 
themselves from the instruments of death, intentional and inadvert-
ent, that also trace back to scientific research. The Australian 
philosopher John Passmore writes in his book Science and Its Critics: 
The Spanish Inquisition sought to avoid direct responsibility 
for the burning of heretics by handing them over to the 
secular arm; to burn them itself, it piously explained, would 
be wholly inconsistent with its Christian principles. Few of us 
would allow the Inquisition thus easily to wipe its hands clean 
of bloodshed; it knew quite well what would happen. 
Equally, where the technological application of scientific 
discoveries is clear and obvious - as when a scientist works on 
nerve gases - he cannot properly claim that such applications 
are 'none of his business', merely on the grounds that it is the 
military forces, not scientists, who use the gases to disable or 
kill. This is even more obvious when the scientist deliberately 
offers help to governments, in exchange for funds. If a 
scientist, or a philosopher, accepts funds from some such 
body as an office of naval research, then he is cheating if he 
knows his work will be useless to them and must take some 
responsibility for the outcome if he knows that it will be 
useful. He is subject, properly subject, to praise or blame in 
relation to any innovations which flow from his work. 
An important case history is provided by the career of the 
268 


When Scientists Know Sin 
Hungarian-born physicist Edward Teller. Teller was marked at a 
young age by the Bela Kuhn communist revolution in Hungary, in 
which the property of middle-class families like his was expropri-
ated, and by losing part of his leg in a streetcar accident, leaving 
him in permanent pain. His early contributions ranged from 
quantum mechanical selection rules and solid state physics to 
cosmology. It was he who chauffeured the physicist Leo Szilard to 
the vacationing Albert Einstein on Long Island in July 1939 - a 
meeting that led to the historic letter from Einstein to President 
Franklin Roosevelt urging, in view of both scientific and political 
events in Nazi Germany, that the United States develop a fission, 
or 'atomic' bomb. Recruited to work on the Manhattan Project, 
Teller arrived at Los Alamos and promptly refused to cooperate -
not because he was dismayed at what an atomic bomb might do, 
but just the opposite: because he wanted to work on a much more 
destructive weapon, the fusion, or thermonuclear, or hydrogen 
bomb. (While there is a practical upper limit on the yield or 
destructive energy of an atomic bomb, there is no such limit for a 
hydrogen bomb. But a hydrogen bomb needs an atomic bomb as 
trigger.) 
After the fission bomb was invented, after Germany and Japan 
surrendered, after the war was over, Teller remained a persistent 
advocate of what was called 'the Super', specifically intended to 
intimidate the Soviet Union. Concern about the rebuilding, 
toughened and militarized Soviet Union under Stalin and the 
national paranoia in America called McCarthyism, eased Teller's 
path. A substantial obstacle was offered, though, in the person of 
Oppenheimer, who had become the chairman of the General 
Advisory Committee to the post-war Atomic Energy Commis-
sion. Teller provided critical testimony at a government hearing, 
questioning Oppenheimer's loyalty to the United States. Teller's 
involvement is generally thought to have played a major role in 
the aftermath: although Oppenheimer's loyalty was not exactly 
impugned by the review board, somehow his security clearance 
was denied, he was retired from the AEC, and Teller's way to the 
Super was greased. 
The technique for making a thermonuclear weapon is generally 
attributed to Teller and the mathematician Stanislas Ulam. Hans 
269 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
Bethe, the Nobel laureate physicist who headed the Theoretical 
Division at the Manhattan Project and who played a major role in 
the development of both the atomic and the hydrogen bombs, 
attests that Teller's original suggestion was flawed, and that the 
work of many people was necessary to bring the thermonuclear 
weapon to reality. With fundamental technical contributions from 
a young physicist named Richard Garwin, the first US thermonu-
clear 'device' was exploded in 1952. It was too unwieldy to be 
carried by a missile or bomber; it just sat there where it was 
assembled and blew up. The first true hydrogen bomb was a 
Soviet invention exploded one year later. There has been debate 
on whether the Soviet Union would have developed a thermonu-
clear weapon if the United States had not, and whether a US 
thermonuclear weapon was even needed to deter Soviet use of 
their hydrogen bomb, since the US by then possessed a substantial 
arsenal of fission weapons. The preponderance of current evi-
dence is that the USSR, even before it exploded its first fission 
bomb, had a workable design for a thermonuclear weapon. It was 
'the next logical step'. But Soviet pursuit of fusion weapons was 
much aided by the knowledge, from espionage, that the Ameri-
cans were working on them. 
From my point of view, the consequences of global nuclear war 
became much more dangerous with the invention of the hydrogen 
bomb, because airbursts of thermonuclear weapons are much 
more capable of burning cities, generating vast amounts of smoke, 
cooling and darkening the Earth, and inducing global-scale 
nuclear winter. This was perhaps the most controversial scientific 
debate I've been involved in (from about 1983-90). Much of the 
debate was politically driven. The strategic implications of nuclear 
winter were disquieting to those wedded to a policy of massive 
retaliation to deter a nuclear attack, or to those wishing to 
preserve the option of a massive first strike. In either case, the 
environmental consequences work the self-destruction of any 
nation launching large numbers of thermonuclear weapons even 
with no retaliation from the adversary. A major segment of the 
strategic policy of decades, and the reason for accumulating tens 
of thousands of nuclear weapons, suddenly became much less 
credible. 
270 


When Scientists Know Sin 
The global temperature declines predicted in the original (1983) 
nuclear winter scientific paper were 15-20°C; current estimates 
are 10-15°C. The two values are in good agreement considering 
the irreducible uncertainties in the calculations. Both temperature 
declines are much greater than the difference between current 
global temperatures and those of the last Ice Age. The long-term 
consequences of global thermonuclear war have been estimated 
by an international team of 200 scientists, who concluded that 
through nuclear winter the global civilization and most of the 
people on Earth, including those far from the northern mid-
latitude target zone, would be at risk, mainly from starvation. If 
large-scale nuclear war ever occurs, with cities targeted, the effort 
of Edward Teller and his colleagues in the United States (and the 
counterpart team headed by Andrei Sakharov in the Soviet 
Union) might be responsible for lowering the curtain on the 
human future. The hydrogen bomb is by far the most horrific 
weapon ever invented. 
When nuclear winter was discovered in 1983, Teller was quick 
to argue both (1) that the physics was mistaken, and (2) that the 
discovery had been made years earlier under his tutelage at the 
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory. There is in fact no 
evidence for such a prior discovery, and considerable evidence 
that those in every nation charged to inform their national leaders 
of the effects of nuclear weapons had consistently overlooked 
nuclear winter. But if Teller is right, then it was unconscionable of 
him not to have disclosed the purported discovery to the affected 
parties - the citizens and leaders of his nation and the world. As in 
the Stanley Kubrick movie Dr Strangelove, classifying the ultimate 
weapon - so no one knows that it exists or what it can do - is the 
ultimate absurdity. 
It seems to me impossible for any normal human being to be 
untroubled by helping to make such an invention, even putting 
nuclear winter aside. The stresses, conscious or unconscious, on 
those who take credit for the contrivance must be considerable. 
Whatever his actual contributions, Edward Teller has been widely 
described as the 'father' of the hydrogen bomb. In an admiring 
1954 article, Life magazine described his 'almost fanatic determi-
nation' to build the hydrogen bomb. Much of his subsequent 
271 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
career can, I think, be understood as an attempt to justify what he 
begat. Teller has contended, not implausibly, that hydrogen 
bombs keep the peace, or at least prevent thermonuclear war, 
because the consequences of warfare between nuclear powers are 
now too dangerous. We haven't had a nuclear war yet, have we? 
But all such arguments assume that the nuclear-armed nations 
are and always will be, without exception, rational actors, and 
that bouts of anger and revenge and madness will never 
overtake their leaders (or military and secret police officers in 
charge of nuclear weapons). In the century of Hitler and Stalin, 
this seems ingenuous. 
Teller has been a major force in preventing a comprehensive 
treaty banning nuclear weapons tests. He made it much more 
difficult to accomplish the 1963 Limited (above-ground) Test Ban 
Treaty. His argument that above-ground testing was essential to 
maintain and 'improve' the nuclear arsenals, that ratifying the 
treaty would 'give away the future safety of our country' has 
proven specious. He has also been a vigorous proponent of the 
safety and cost-effectiveness of fission power plants, claiming 
himself to be the only casualty of the Three Mile Island nuclear 
accident in Pennsylvania in 1979; he had a heart attack, he says, 
debating the issue. 
Teller advocated exploding nuclear weapons from Alaska to 
South Africa, to dredge harbours and canals, to obliterate trou-
blesome mountains, to do heavy earth-moving. When he pro-
posed such a scheme to Queen Frederika of Greece, she is said to 
have responded, 'Thank you, Dr Teller, but Greece has enough 
quaint ruins already.' Want to test Einstein's general relativity? 
Then explode a nuclear weapon on the far side of the Sun, Teller 
proposed. Want to understand the chemical composition of the 
Moon? Then fly a hydrogen bomb to the Moon, explode it, and 
examine the spectrum of the flash and fireball. 
Also in the 1980s, Teller sold President Ronald Reagan the 
notion of Star Wars, called by them the 'Strategic Defense 
Initiative', SDI Reagan seems to have believed a highly imagina-
tive story of Teller's that it was possible to build a desk-sized 
orbiting hydrogen-bomb-driven X-ray laser that would destroy 
10,000 Soviet warheads in flight, and provide genuine protection 
272 


When Scientists Know Sin 
for the citizens of the United States in case of global thermo-
nuclear war. 
It is claimed by apologists for the Reagan administration 
that, whatever the exaggerations in capability, some of it 
intentional, SDI was responsible for the collapse of the Soviet 
Union. There is no serious evidence in support of this conten-
tion. Andrei Sakharov, Yevgeny Velikhov, Roald Sagdeev, and 
other scientists who advised President Mikhail Gorbachev 
made it clear that if the United States really went ahead with a 
Star Wars programme, the safest and cheapest Soviet response 
would be merely to augment its existing arsenal of nuclear 
weapons and delivery systems. In this way Star Wars could have 
increased, not decreased, the peril of thermonuclear war. At 
any rate, Soviet expenditures on space-based defences against 
American nuclear missiles were comparatively paltry, hardly of 
a magnitude to trigger a collapse of the Soviet economy. The 
fall of the USSR has much more to do with the failure of the 
command economy, growing awareness of the standard of 
living in the west, widespread disaffection from a moribund 
Communist ideology, and - although he did not intend such an 
outcome - Gorbachev's promotion of glasnost, or openness. 
Ten thousand American scientists and engineers publicly 
pledged they would not work on Star Wars or accept money from 
the SDI organization. This provides an example of widespread 
and courageous non-cooperation by scientists (at some conceiv-
able personal cost) with a democratic government that had, 
temporarily at least, lost its way. 
Teller has also advocated the development of burrowing 
nuclear warheads, so that underground command centres and 
deeply buried shelters for the leadership (and their families) of an 
adversary nation might be dug down to and wiped out; and 
0.1-kiloton nuclear warheads that would saturate an enemy coun-
try, obliterating its infrastructure 'without a single casualty'. 
Civilians would be alerted in advance. Nuclear war would be 
humane. 
As I write, Edward Teller - still vigorous and retaining consid-
erable intellectual powers into his late eighties - has mounted a 
campaign, with his counterpart in the former Soviet nuclear 
273 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
weapons establishment, to develop and explode new genera-
tions of high-yield thermonuclear weapons in space, in order to 
destroy or deflect asteroids that might be on collision trajecto-
ries with the Earth. I worry that premature experimentation 
with the orbits of nearby asteroids may involve extreme dangers 
for our species. 
Dr Teller and I have met privately. We've debated at 
scientific meetings, in the national media, and in a closed rump 
session of Congress. We've had strong disagreements, espe-
cially on Star Wars, nuclear winter and asteroid defence. 
Perhaps all this has hopelessly coloured my view of him. 
Although he has always been a fervent anticommunist and 
technophile, as I look back over his life it seems to me I see 
something more in his desperate attempt to justify the hydro-
gen bomb: its effects aren't as bad as you might think. It can be 
used to defend the world from other hydrogen bombs, for 
science, for civil engineering, to protect the population of the 
United States against an enemy's thermonuclear weapons, to 
wage war humanely, to save the planet from random hazards 
from space. Somehow, somewhere, he wants to believe that 
thermonuclear weapons, and he, will be acknowledged by the 
human species as its saviour and not its destroyer. 
When scientific research provides fallible nations and politi-
cal leaders with formidable, indeed awesome powers, many 
dangers present themselves: one is that some of the scientists 
involved may lose all but a superficial semblance of objectivity. 
As always, power tends to corrupt. In this circumstance, the 
institution of secrecy is especially pernicious, and the checks 
and balances of a democracy become especially valuable. 
(Teller, who has flourished in the secrecy culture, has also 
repeatedly attacked it.) The CIA Inspector General com-
mented in 1995 that 'absolute secrecy corrupts absolutely'. The 
most open and vigorous debate is often the only protection 
against the most perilous misuse of technology. The critical 
piece of the counterargument may be something obvious that 
many scientists or even lay people could come up with provided 
there were no penalties for speaking out. Or it might be 
something more subtle, something that would be noted by an 
274 


When Scientists Know Sin 
obscure graduate student in some locale remote from Washington, 
DC, who, if the arguments were closely held and highly secret, 
would never have the opportunity to address the issue. 
What realm of human endeavour is not morally ambiguous? Even 
folk institutions that purport to give us advice on behaviour and 
ethics seem fraught with contradictions. Consider aphorisms -
haste makes waste; yes, but a stitch in time saves nine. Better safe 
than sorry; but nothing ventured, nothing gained. Where there's 
smoke, there's fire; but you can't tell a book by its cover. A penny 
saved is a penny earned; but you can't take it with you. He who 
hesitates is lost; but fools rush in where angels fear to tread. Two 
heads are better than one; but too many cooks spoil the broth. 
There was a time when people planned or justified their actions on 
the basis of such contradictory platitudes. What is the moral 
responsibility of the aphorist? Or the Sun-sign astrologer, the 
Tarot card reader, the tabloid prophet? 
Or consider the mainstream religions. We are enjoined in 
Micah to do justly and love mercy; in Exodus we are forbidden to 
commit murder; in Leviticus we are commanded to love our 
neighbour as ourselves; and in the Gospels we are urged to love 
our enemies. Yet think of the rivers of blood spilled by fervent 
followers of the books in which these well-meaning exhortations 
are embedded. 
In Joshua and in the second half of Numbers is celebrated the 
mass murder of men, women, children, down to the domestic 
animals in city after city across the whole land of Canaan. Jericho 
is obliterated in a kherem, a 'holy war'. The only justification 
offered for this slaughter is the mass murderers' claim that, in 
exchange for circumcising their sons and adopting a particular set 
of rituals, their ancestors were long before promised that this land 
was their land. Not a hint of self-reproach, not a muttering of 
patriarchal or divine disquiet at these campaigns of extermination 
can be dug out of holy scripture. Instead, Joshua 'destroyed all 
that breathed, as the Lord God of Israel commanded' (Joshua, x, 
40). And these events are not incidental, but central to the main 
narrative thrust of the Old Testament. Similar stories of mass 
murder (and in the case of the Amalekites, genocide) can be 
275 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
found in the books of Saul, Esther, and elsewhere in the Bible, 
with hardly a pang of moral doubt. It was all, of course, troubling 
to liberal theologians of a later age. 
It is properly said that the Devil can 'quote Scripture to his 
purpose'. The Bible is full of so many stories of contradictory 
moral purpose that every generation can find scriptural justifica-
tion for nearly any action it proposes, from incest, slavery and 
mass murder to the most refined love, courage and self-sacrifice. 
And this moral multiple personality disorder is hardly restricted to 
Judaism and Christianity. You can find it deep within Islam, the 
Hindu tradition, indeed nearly all the world's religions. Perhaps 
then it is not so much scientists as people who are morally 
ambiguous. 
It is the particular task of scientists, I believe, to alert the public 
to possible dangers, especially those emanating from science or 
foreseeable through the use of science. Such a mission is, you 
might say, prophetic. Clearly the warnings need to be judicious 
and not more flamboyant than the dangers require; but if we must 
make errors, given the stakes, they should be on the side of safety. 
Among the !Kung San hunter-gatherers of the Kalahari Desert, 
when two men, perhaps testosterone-inflamed, would begin to 
argue, the women would reach for their poison arrows and put the 
weapons out of harm's way. Today our poison arrows can destroy 
the global civilization and just possibly annihilate our species. The 
price of moral ambiguity is now too high. For this reason - and not 
because of its approach to knowledge - the ethical responsibility 
of scientists must also be high, extraordinarily high, unprecedent-
edly high. I wish graduate science programmes explicitly and 
systematically raised these questions with fledgling scientists and 
engineers. And sometimes I wonder whether in our society, too, 
the women - and the children - will eventually put the poison 
arrows out of harm's way. 
276 


17 
The Marriage of Scepticism 
and Wonder 
Nothing is too wonderful to be true. 
Remark attributed to 
Michael Faraday (1791-1867) 
Insight, untested and unsupported, is an insufficient 
guarantee of truth. 
hen we are asked to swear in courts of law that we will tell 
'the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth', we 
are being asked the impossible. It is simply beyond our powers. 
Our memories are fallible; even scientific truth is merely an 
approximation; and we are ignorant about nearly all of the 
Universe. Nevertheless, a life may depend on our testimony. To 
swear to tell the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth 
to the limit of our abilities is a fair request. Without the qualifying 
phrase, though, it's simply out of touch. But such a qualification, 
however consonant with human reality, is unacceptable to any 
legal system. If everyone tells the truth only to a degree deter-
mined by individual judgement, then incriminating or awkward 
facts might be withheld, events shaded, culpability hidden, 
responsibility evaded, and justice denied. So the law strives for an 
impossible standard of accuracy, and we do the best we can. 
Bertrand Russell, 
Mysticism and Logic (1929) 
277 
w 
