THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
- the discipline out of which it emerged. The pseudosciences 
sometimes intersect, compounding the confusion - as in telepathic 
searches for buried treasures from Atlantis, or astrological economic 
forecasting. 
But because I work mainly with planets, and because I've been 
interested in the possibility of extraterrestrial life, the pseudo-
sciences that most often park themselves on my doorstep involve 
other worlds and what we have come so easily in our time to call 
'aliens'. In the chapters immediately following, I want to lay out 
two recent, somewhat related pseudoscientific doctrines. They 
share the possibility that human perceptual and cognitive imper-
fections play a role in deceiving us on matters of great import. The 
first contends that a giant stone face from ages past is staring 
expressionlessly up at the sky from the sands of Mars. The second 
maintains that alien beings from distant worlds visit the Earth with 
casual impunity. 
Even when summarized so baldly, isn't there a kind of thrill in 
contemplating these claims? What if such hoary science fiction 
ideas - resonant surely with deep human fears and longings -
actually were coming to pass? Whose interest can fail to be 
aroused? Immersed in such material, even the crassest cynic is 
stirred. Are we absolutely sure, beyond the shadow of a doubt, 
that we can dismiss these claims? And if hardened debunkers can 
sense the appeal, what must those untutored in scientific scepti-
cism, like Mr 'Buckley', feel? 
For most of history - before spacecraft, before telescopes, when 
we were still largely immersed in magical thinking - the Moon was 
an enigma. Almost no one thought of it as a world. 
What do we actually see when we look up at the Moon with the 
naked eye? We make out a configuration of irregular bright and 
dark markings - not a close representation of any familiar object. 
But, almost irresistibly, our eyes connect the markings, emphasiz-
ing some, ignoring others. We seek a pattern and we find one. In 
world myth and folklore, many images are seen: a woman 
weaving, stands of laurel trees, an elephant jumping off a cliff, a 
girl with a basket on her back, a rabbit, the lunar intestines spilled 
out on its surface after evisceration by an irritable flightless bird, a 
44 


The Man in the Moon and the Face on Mars 
woman pounding tapa cloth, a four-eyed jaguar. People of one 
culture have trouble understanding how such bizarre things could 
be seen by the people of another. 
The most common image is the Man in the Moon. Of course, it 
doesn't really look like a man. Its features are lopsided, warped, 
drooping. There's a beefsteak or something over the left eye. And 
what expression does that mouth convey? An 'O' of surprise? A 
hint of sadness, even lamentation? Doleful recognition of the 
travails of life on Earth? Certainly the face is too round. The ears 
are missing. I guess he's bald on top. Nevertheless, every time I 
look at it, I see a human face. 
World folklore depicts the Moon as something prosaic. In the 
pre-Apollo generation, children were told that the Moon was 
made of green (that is, smelly) cheese, and for some reason this 
was thought not marvellous but hilarious. In children's books and 
editorial cartoons, the Man in the Moon is often drawn simply as a 
face set in a circle, not too different from the bland 'happy face' of 
a pair of dots and an upturned arc. Benignly, he looks down on 
the nocturnal frolics of animals and children, of the knife and the 
spoon. 
Consider again the two categories of terrain we recognize when 
we examine the Moon with the naked eye: the brighter forehead, 
cheeks and chin, and the darker eyes and mouth. Through a 
telescope, the bright features are revealed to be ancient cratered 
highlands, dating back, we now know (from the radioactive dating 
of samples returned by the Apollo astronauts), to almost 4.5 
billion years ago. The dark features are somewhat younger flows 
of basaltic lava called maria (singular, mare - both from the Latin 
word for ocean, although the Moon, we now know, is dry as a 
bone). The maria welled up in the first few hundred million years 
of lunar history, partly induced by the high-speed impact of 
enormous asteroids and comets. The right eye is Mare Imbrium, 
the beefsteak drooping over the left eye is the combination of 
Mare Serenitatis and Mare Tranquilitatis (where Apollo 11 
landed), and the off-centre open mouth is Mare Humorum. (No 
craters can be made out by ordinary, unaided human vision.) 
The Man in the Moon is in fact a record of ancient catastrophes, 
most of which took place before humans, before mammals, before 
45 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
vertebrates, before multicelled organisms, and probably even 
before life arose on Earth. It is a characteristic conceit of our 
species to put a human face on random cosmic violence. 
Humans, like other primates, are a gregarious lot. We enjoy one 
another's company. We're mammals and parental care of the young 
is essential for the continuance of the hereditary lines. The parent 
smiles at the child, the child smiles back, and a bond is forged or 
strengthened. As soon as the infant can see, it recognizes faces, and 
we now know that this skill is hardwired in our brains. Those infants 
who a million years ago were unable to recognize a face smiled back 
less, were less likely to win the hearts of their parents and less likely 
to prosper. These days, nearly every infant is quick to identify a 
human face and to respond with a goony grin. 
As an inadvertent side effect, the pattern-recognition machin-
ery in our brains is so efficient in extracting a face from a clutter of 
other detail that we sometimes see faces where there are none. 
We assemble disconnected patches of light and dark and uncon-
sciously try to see a face. The Man in the Moon is one result. 
Michelangelo Antonioni's film Blowup describes another. There 
are many other examples. 
Sometimes it's a geological formation, such as the Old Man of 
the Mountain at Franconia Notch, New Hampshire. We recognize 
that, rather than some supernatural agency or an otherwise 
undiscovered ancient civilization in New Hampshire, this is the 
product of erosion and collapse of a rock face. Anyway, it doesn't 
look much like a face anymore. There's the Devil's Head in North 
Carolina, the Sphinx Rock in Wast Water, Cumbria, England, the 
Old Woman in France, the Vartan Rock in Armenia. Sometimes 
it's a reclining woman, as Mt Ixtaccihuatl in Mexico. Sometimes 
it's other body parts, as the Grand Tetons in Wyoming -
approached from the West, a pair of mountain peaks named by 
French explorers. (Actually there are three.) Sometimes it's 
changing patterns in the clouds. In late medieval and renaissance 
Spain, visions of the Virgin Mary were 'confirmed' by people 
seeing saints in cloud forms. (While sailing out of Suva, Fiji, I 
once saw the head of a truly terrifying monster, jaws agape, set in 
a brooding storm cloud.) 
46 


The Man in the Moon and the Face on Mars 
Occasionally, a vegetable or a pattern of wood grain or the hide 
of a cow resembles a human face. There was a celebrated eggplant 
that closely resembled Richard M. Nixon. What shall we deduce 
from this fact? Divine or extraterrestrial intervention? Republican 
meddling in eggplant genetics? No. We recognize that there are 
large numbers of eggplants in the world and that, given enough of 
them, sooner or later we'll come upon one that looks like a human 
face, even a very particular human face. 
When the face is of a religious personage - as, for example, a 
tortilla purported to exhibit the face of Jesus - believers tend 
quickly to deduce the hand of God. In an age more sceptical than 
most, they crave reassurance. Still, it seems unlikely that a miracle 
is being worked on so evanescent a medium. Considering how 
many tortillas have been pounded out since the beginning of the 
world, it would be surprising if a few didn't have at least vaguely 
familiar features.* 
Magical properties have been ascribed to ginseng and man-
drake roots, in part because of vague resemblances to the 
human form. Some chestnut shoots show smiling faces. Some 
corals look like hands. The ear fungus (also unpleasantly called 
'Jew's ear') indeed looks like an ear, and something rather like 
enormous eyes can be seen on the wings of certain moths. Some 
of this may not be mere coincidence; plants and animals that 
suggest a face may be less likely to be gobbled up by creatures 
with faces - or creatures who are afraid of predators with faces. 
A 'walking stick' is an insect spectacularly well disguised as a 
twig. Naturally, it tends to live on and around trees. Its mimicry 
of the plant world saves it from birds and other predators, and 
is almost certainly the reason that its extraordinary form was 
slowly moulded by Darwinian natural selection. Such crossings 
of the boundaries between kingdoms of life are unnerving. A 
* These cases are very different from that of the so-called Shroud of Turin, which 
shows something too close to a human form to be a misapprehended natural 
pattern and which is now suggested by carbon-14 dating to be not the death 
shroud of Jesus, but a pious hoax from the fourteenth century - a time when 
the manufacture of fraudulent religious relics was a thriving and profitable 
home handicraft industry. 
47 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
young child viewing a walking stick can easily imagine an army 
of sticks, branches and trees marching for some ominous planty 
purpose. 
Many instances of this sort are described and illustrated in a 
1979 book called Natural Likeness by John Michell, a British 
enthusiast of the occult. He takes seriously the claims of 
Richard Shaver, who - as described below - played a role in the 
origin of the UFO excitement in America. Shaver cut open 
rocks on his Wisconsin farm and discovered, written in a 
pictographic language that only he could see, much less under-
stand, a comprehensive history of the world. Michell also 
accepts at face value the claims of the dramatist and surrealist 
theoretician Antonin Artaud, who, in part under the influence 
of peyote, saw in the patterns on the outsides of rocks erotic 
images, a man being tortured, ferocious animals and the like. 
'The whole landscape revealed itself,' Michell says, 'as the 
creation of a single thought.' But a key question: was that 
thought inside or outside Artaud's head? Artaud concluded, 
and Michell agrees, that the patterns so apparent in the rocks 
were manufactured by an ancient civilization, rather than by 
Artaud's partly hallucinogen-induced altered state of con-
sciousness. When Artaud returned from Mexico to Europe, he 
was diagnosed as mad. Michell decries the 'materialist outlook' 
that greeted Artaud's patterns sceptically. 
Michell shows us a photograph of the Sun taken in X-ray light 
which looks vaguely like a face and informs us that 'followers of 
Gurdjieff see the face of their Master' in the solar corona. 
Innumerable faces in trees, mountains and boulders all over the 
world are inferred to be the product of ancient wisdom. 
Perhaps some are: it's a good practical joke, as well as a 
tempting religious symbol, to pile stones so from afar they look 
like a giant face. 
The view that most of these forms are patterns natural to 
rock-forming processes and the bilateral symmetry of plants and 
animals, plus a little natural selection - all processed through the 
human-biased filter of our perception - Michell describes as 
'materialism' and a 'nineteenth-century delusion'. 'Conditioned 
by rationalist beliefs, our view of the world is duller and more 
48 


The Man in the Moon and the Face on Mars 
confined than nature intended.' By what process he has plumbed 
the intentions of Nature is not revealed. 
Of the images he presents, Michell concludes that 
their mystery remains essentially untouched, a constant 
source of wonder, delight and speculation. All we know for 
sure is that nature created them and at the same time gave us 
the apparatus to perceive them and minds to appreciate their 
endless fascination. For the greatest profit and enjoyment 
they should be viewed as nature intended, with the eye of 
innocence, unclouded by theories and preconceptions, with 
the manifold vision, innate in all of us, that enriches and 
dignifies human life, rather than with the cultivated single 
vision of the dull and opinionated. 
Perhaps the most famous spurious claim of a portentous pattern 
involves the canals of Mars. First observed in 1877, they were 
seemingly confirmed by a succession of dedicated professional 
astronomers peering through large telescopes all over the 
world. A network of single and double straight lines was 
reported, crisscrossing the Martian surface and with such 
uncanny geometrical regularity that they could only be of 
intelligent origin. Evocative conclusions were drawn about a 
parched and dying planet populated by an older and wiser 
technical civilization dedicated to conservation of water 
resources. Hundreds of canals were mapped and named. But, 
oddly, they avoided showing up on photographs. The human 
eye, it was suggested, could remember the brief instants of 
perfect atmospheric transparency, while the undiscriminating 
photographic plate averaged the few clear with the many blurry 
moments. Some astronomers saw the canals. Many did not. 
Perhaps certain observers were more skilled at seeing canals. Or 
perhaps the whole business was some kind of perceptual delusion. 
Much of the idea of Mars as an abode of life, as well as the 
prevalence of 'Martians' in popular fiction, derives from the 
canals. I myself grew up steeped in this literature, and when I 
found myself an experimenter on the Mariner 9 mission to Mars -
the first spacecraft to orbit the red planet - naturally I was 
49 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
interested to see what the real circumstances were. With Mariner 
9 and with Viking, we were able to map the planet pole-to-pole, 
detecting features hundreds of times smaller than the best that 
could be seen from Earth. I found, not altogether to my surprise, 
not a trace of canals. There were a few more or less linear features 
that had been made out through the telescope - for example, a 
5,000-kilometre-long rift valley that would have been hard to 
miss. But the hundreds of 'classical' canals carrying water from the 
polar caps through the arid deserts to the parched equatorial cities 
simply did not exist. They were an illusion, some malfunction of 
the human hand-eye-brain combination at the limit of resolution 
when we peer through an unsteady and turbulent atmosphere. 
Even a succession of professional scientists - including famous 
astronomers who had made other discoveries that are confirmed 
and now justly celebrated - can make serious, even profound 
errors in pattern recognition. Especially where the implications of 
what we think we are seeing seem to be profound, we may not 
exercise adequate self-discipline and self-criticism. The Martian 
canal myth constitutes an important cautionary tale. 
For the canals, spacecraft missions provided the means of 
correcting our misapprehensions. But it is also true that some of 
the most haunting claims of unexpected patterns emerge from 
spacecraft exploration. In the early 1960s, I urged that we be 
attentive to the possibility of finding the artefacts of ancient 
civilizations, either those indigenous to a given world, or those 
constructed by visitors from elsewhere. I didn't imagine that this 
would be easy or probable, and I certainly did not suggest that, on 
so important a matter, anything short of iron-clad evidence would 
be worth considering. 
Beginning with John Glenn's evocative report of 'fireflies' sur-
rounding his space capsule, every time an astronaut reported seeing 
something not immediately understood, there were those who 
deduced 'aliens'. Prosaic explanations - specks of paint flecking off 
the ship in the space environment, say - were dismissed with 
contempt. The lure of the marvellous blunts our critical faculties. (As 
if a man become a moon is not marvel enough.) 
Around the time of the Apollo lunar landings, many non-
experts - owners of small telescopes, flying saucer zealots, writers 
50 


The Man in the Moon and the Face on Mars 
for aerospace magazines - pored over the returned photographs 
seeking anomalies that NASA scientists and astronauts had 
overlooked. Soon there were reports of gigantic Latin letters and 
Arabic numerals inscribed on the lunar surface, pyramids, high-
ways, crosses, glowing UFOs. Bridges were reported on the 
Moon, radio antennas, the tracks of enormous crawling vehicles, 
and the devastation left by machines able to slice craters in two. 
Every one of these claims, though, turns out to be a natural lunar 
geological formation misjudged by amateur analysts, internal 
reflections in the optics of the astronauts' Hasselblad cameras, 
and the like. Some enthusiasts discerned the long shadows of 
ballistic missiles - Soviet missiles, it was ominously confided, 
aimed at America. The rockets, also described as 'spires', turn out 
to be low hills casting long shadows when the Sun is near the lunar 
horizon. A little trigonometry dispels the mirage. 
These experiences also provide fair warning: for a complex 
terrain sculpted by unfamiliar processes, amateurs (and some-
times even professionals) examining photographs, especially near 
the limit of resolution, may get into trouble. Their hopes and 
fears, the excitement of possible discoveries of great import, may 
overwhelm the usual sceptical and cautious approach of science. 
If we examine available surface images of Venus, occasionally a 
peculiar landform swims into view - as, for example, a rough 
portrait of Joseph Stalin discovered by American geologists 
analysing Soviet orbital radar imagery. No one maintains, I 
gather, that unreconstructed Stalinists had doctored the magnetic 
tapes, or that the former Soviets were engaged in engineering 
activities of unprecedented and hitherto unrevealed scale on the 
surface of Venus - where every spacecraft to land has been fried in 
an hour or two. The odds are overwhelming that this feature, 
whatever it is, is due to geology. The same is true of what seems to 
be a portrait of the cartoon character Bugs Bunny on the Uranian 
moon Ariel. A Hubble space telescope image of Titan in the 
near-infrared shows clouds roughly configured to make a world-
sized smiling face. Every planetary scientist has a favourite 
example. 
The astronomy of the Milky Way also is replete with imagined 
likenesses - for example, the Horsehead, Eskimo, Owl, 
51 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
Homunculus, Tarantula and North American Nebulae, all irregu-
lar clouds of gas and dust, illuminated by bright stars and each on 
a scale that dwarfs our solar system. When astronomers mapped 
the distribution of galaxies out to a few hundred million light 
years, they found themselves outlining a crude human form which 
has been called 'the Stickman'. The configuration is understood as 
something like enormous adjacent soap bubbles, the galaxies 
formed on the surface of adjacent bubbles and almost no galaxies 
in the interiors. This makes it quite likely that they will mark out a 
pattern with bilateral symmetry something like the Stickman. 
Mars is much more clement than Venus, although the Viking 
landers provided no compelling evidence for life. Its terrain is 
extremely heterogeneous and diverse. With 100,000 or so close-up 
photographs available, it is not surprising that claims have been 
made over the years about something unusual on Mars. There is, for 
example, a cheerful 'happy face' sitting inside a Martian impact 
crater 8 kilometres (5 miles) across, with a set of radial splash marks 
outside, making it look like the conventional representation of a 
smiling Sun. But no one claims that this has been engineered by an 
advanced (and excessively genial) Martian civilization, perhaps to 
attract our attention. We recognize that, with objects of all sizes 
falling out of the sky, with the surface rebounding, slumping and 
reconfiguring itself after each impact, and with ancient water and 
mudflows and modern windborne sand sculpting the surface, a wide 
variety of landforms must be generated. If we scrutinize 100,000 
pictures, it's not surprising that occasionally we'll come upon some-
thing like a face. With our brains programmed for this from infancy, 
it would be amazing if we couldn't find one here and there. 
A few small mountains on Mars resemble pyramids. In the 
Elysium high plateau, there is a cluster of them - the biggest a few 
kilometres across at the base - all oriented in the same direction. 
There is something a little eerie about these pyramids in the 
desert, so reminiscent of the Gizeh plateau in Egypt, and I would 
love to examine them more closely. Is it reasonable, though, to 
deduce Martian pharaohs? 
Similar features are also known on Earth in miniature, espe-
cially in Antarctica. Some of them would come up to your knees. 
If we knew nothing else about them, would it be fair to conclude 
52 


The Man in the Moon and the Face on Mars 
that they've been manufactured by scale-model Egyptians living in 
the Antarctic wasteland? (The hypothesis loosely fits the observa-
tions, but much else we know about the polar environment and the 
physiology of humans speaks against it.) They are, in fact, generated 
by wind erosion - the splatter of fine particles picked up by strong 
winds blowing mainly in the same direction and, over the years, 
sculpting what once were irregular hummocks into nicely symmetri-
cal pyramids. They're called dreikanters, from a German word 
meaning three sides. This is order generated out of chaos by natural 
processes - something we see over and over again throughout the 
Universe (in rotating spiral galaxies, for instance). Each time it 
happens we're tempted to infer the direct intervention of a Maker. 
On Mars, there is evidence of winds much fiercer than any ever 
experienced on Earth, ranging up to half the speed of sound. 
Planet-wide duststorms are common, carrying fine grains of sand. 
A steady pitter-patter of particles moving much faster than in the 
fiercest gales of Earth should, over ages of geological time, work 
profound changes in rock faces and landforms. It would not be too 
surprising if a few features - even very large ones - were sculpted 
by aeolian processes into the pyramidal forms we see. 
There is a place on Mars called Cydonia, where a great stone face a 
kilometre across stares unblinkingly up at the sky. It is an unfriendly 
face, but one that seems recognizably human. In some representa-
tions, it could have been sculpted by Praxiteles. It lies in a landscape 
where many low hills have been moulded into odd forms, perhaps by 
some mixture of ancient mudflows and subsequent wind erosion. 
From the number of impact craters, the surrounding terrain looks to 
be at least hundreds of millions of years old. 
Intermittently, 'The Face' has attracted attention, both in the 
United States and in the former Soviet Union. The headline in the 
20 November 1984 Weekly World News, a supermarket tabloid 
not celebrated for its integrity, read: 
SOVIET SCIENTIST'S AMAZING CLAIM: RUINED 
TEMPLES FOUND ON MARS. SPACE PROBE DIS-
COVERS REMAINS OF 50,000-YEAR-OLD CIVILIZA-
TION. 
53 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
The revelations are attributed to an anonymous Soviet source and 
breathlessly describe discoveries made by a nonexistent Soviet 
space vehicle. 
But the story of 'The Face' is almost entirely an American one. 
It was found by one of the Viking orbiters in 1976. There was an 
unfortunate dismissal of the feature by a project official as a trick 
of light and shadow, which prompted a later accusation that 
NASA was covering up the discovery of the millennium. A few 
engineers, computer specialists and others - some of them con-
tract employees of NASA - worked on their own time digitally to 
enhance the image. Perhaps they hoped for stunning revelations. 
That's permissible in science, even encouraged - as long as your 
standards of evidence are high. Some of them were fairly cautious 
and deserve to be commended for advancing the subject. Others 
were less restrained, deducing not only that the Face was a 
genuine, monumental sculpture of a human being, but claiming to 
find a city nearby with temples and fortifications.* From spurious 
arguments, one writer announced that the monuments had a 
particular astronomical orientation - not now, though, but half a 
million years ago - from which it followed that the Cydonian 
wonders were erected in that remote epoch. But then how could 
the builders have been human? Half a million years ago, our 
ancestors were busy mastering stone tools and fire. They did not 
have spaceships. 
The Martian Face is compared to 'similar faces . . . constructed 
in civilizations on Earth. The faces are looking up at the sky 
because they're looking up to God.' Or the Face was constructed 
by the survivors of an interplanetary war that left the surface of 
Mars (and the Moon) pockmarked and ravaged. What causes all 
those craters anyway? Is the Face a remnant of a long-extinct 
human civilization? Were the builders originally from Earth or 
Mars? Could the Face have been sculpted by interstellar visitors 
* The general idea is quite old, going back at least a century to the Martian canal 
myth of Percival Lowell. As one of many examples, P.E. Cleator, in his 1936 
book Rockets Through Space: The Dawn of Interplanetary Travel, speculated: 
'On Mars, the crumbling remains of ancient civilizations may be found, mutely 
testifying to the one-time glory of a dying world.' 
54 


The Man in the Moon and the Face on Mars 
stopping briefly on Mars? Was it left for us to discover? Might 
they also have come to Earth and initiated life here? Or at least 
human life? Were they, whoever they were, gods? Much fervent 
speculation is evoked. 
More recently, claims have been made for a connection between 
'monuments' on Mars and 'crop circles' on Earth; of inexhaustible 
supplies of energy waiting to be extracted from ancient Martian 
machines; and of a massive NASA cover-up to hide the truth from 
the American public. Such pronouncements go far beyond more 
incautious speculation about enigmatic landforms. 
When, in August 1993, the Mars Observer spacecraft failed 
within hailing distance of Mars, there were those who accused 
NASA of faking the mishap so it could study the Face in detail 
without having to release the images to the public. (If so, the 
charade is quite elaborate: all the experts on Martian geomorphol-
ogy know nothing about it, and some of us have been working 
hard to design new missions to Mars less vulnerable to the 
malfunction that destroyed Mars Observer.) There was even a 
handful of pickets outside the gates of the Jet Propulsion Labora-
tory, worked up over this supposed abuse of power. 
The tabloid Weekly World News for 14 September 1993 devoted 
its front page to the headline 'New NASA Photo Proves Humans 
Lived on Mars!' A fake face, allegedly taken by Mars Observer in 
orbit about Mars (in fact, the spacecraft seems to have failed 
before achieving orbit), is said by a non-existent 'leading space 
scientist' to prove that Martians colonized Earth 200,000 years 
ago. The information is being suppressed, he is made to say, to 
prevent 'world panic'. 
Put aside the improbability that such a revelation would actually 
lead to 'world panic'. For anyone who has witnessed a portentous 
scientific finding in the making - the July 1994 impact of Comet 
Shoemaker-Levy 9 with Jupiter comes to mind - it will be clear 
that scientists tend to be effervescent and uncontainable. They 
have an indomitable compulsion to share new data. Only through 
prior agreement, not ex post facto, do scientists abide military 
secrecy. I reject the notion that science is by its nature secretive. 
Its culture and ethos are, and for very good reason, collective, 
collaborative and communicative. 
55 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
If we restrict ourselves to what is actually known, and ignore the 
tabloid industry that manufactures epochal discoveries out of thin 
air, where are we? When we know only a little about the Face, it 
raises goosebumps. When we know a little more, the mystery 
quickly shallows. 
Mars has a surface area of almost 150 million square kilometres. 
Is it so astonishing that one (comparatively) postage-stamp-sized 
patch in 150 million should look artificial - especially given our 
penchant, since infancy, for finding faces? When we examine the 
neighbouring jumble of hillocks, mesas and other complex surface 
forms, we recognize that the feature is akin to many that do not at 
all resemble a human face. Why this resemblance? Would the 
ancient Martian engineers rework only this mesa (well, maybe a 
few others) and leave all others unimproved by monumental 
sculpture? Or shall we conclude that other blocky mesas are also 
sculpted into the form of faces, but weirder faces, unfamiliar to us 
on Earth? 
If we study the original image more carefully, we find that a 
strategically placed 'nostril' - one that adds much to the impres-
sion of a face - is in fact a black dot corresponding to lost data in 
the radio transmission from Mars to Earth. The best picture of the 
Face shows one side lit by the Sun, the other in deep shadow. 
Using the original digital data, we can severely enhance the 
contrast in the shadows. When we do, we find something rather 
unfacelike there. The Face is at best half a face. Despite our 
shortness of breath and the beating of our hearts, the Martian 
sphinx looks natural - not artificial, not a dead ringer for a human 
face. It was probably sculpted by slow geological process over 
millions of years. 
But I might be wrong. It's hard to be sure about a world we've 
seen so little of in extreme close-up. These features merit closer 
attention with higher resolution. Much more detailed photos of 
the Face would surely settle issues of symmetry and help resolve 
the debate between geology and monumental sculpture. Small 
impact craters found on or near the Face can settle the question of 
its age. In the case (most unlikely in my view) that the nearby 
structures were really once a city, that fact should also be obvious 
on closer examination. Are there broken streets? Crenellations in 
56 


The Man in the Moon and the Face on Mars 
the 'fort'? Ziggurats, towers, columned temples, monumental 
statuary, immense frescoes? Or just rocks? 
Even if these claims are extremely improbable - as I think they 
are - they are worth examining. Unlike the UFO phenomenon, 
we have here the opportunity for a definitive experiment. This 
kind of hypothesis is falsifiable, a property that brings it well into 
the scientific arena. I hope that forthcoming American and 
Russian missions to Mars, especially orbiters with high-resolution 
television cameras, will make a special effort - among hundreds of 
other scientific questions - to look much more closely at the 
pyramids and what some people call the Face and the city. 
Even if it becomes plain to everyone that these Martian features 
are geological and not artificial, monumental faces in space (and 
allied wonders) will not, I fear, go away. Already there are 
supermarket tabloids reporting nearly identical faces seen from 
Venus to Neptune (floating in the clouds?). The 'findings' are 
typically attributed to fictitious Russian spacecraft and imaginary 
space scientists, which of course makes it marginally harder for a 
sceptic to check the story out. 
One of the Mars face enthusiasts now announces: 
Breakthru News of the Century 
Censored by NASA 
for fear of Religious upheavals and breakdowns. 
The Discovery of ancient 
ALIEN RUINS ON THE MOON 
A 'giant city, size of Los Angeles basin, covered by immense glass 
dome, abandoned millions of years ago, and shattered by meteors 
with gigantic tower 5 miles tall, with giant one mile square cube on 
top' is breathlessly 'CONFIRMED' on the well-studied Moon. 
The evidence? Photos taken by NASA robotic and Apollo mis-
sions whose significance was suppressed by the government and 
overlooked by all those lunar scientists in many countries who 
don't work for the 'government'. 
The 18 August 1992 issue of Weekly World News reports the 
discovery by 'a secret NASA satellite' of 'thousands maybe even 
57 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
millions of voices' emanating from the black hole at the centre of 
the galaxy M51, all singing ' "Glory, glory, glory to the Lord on 
high" over and over again'. In English. There is even a tabloid 
report, fully although murkily illustrated, of a space probe that 
photographed God, or at least his eyes and the bridge of his nose, 
up there in the Orion Nebula. 
The 20 July 1993 WWN sports a banner headline, 'Clinton 
Meets with JFK!' along with a faked photo of a plausibly aged, 
slumped-over John Kennedy, having secretly survived the assassi-
nation attempt, in a wheelchair at Camp David. Many pages 
inside the tabloid, we are informed about another item of possible 
interest. In 'Doomsday Asteroids', an alleged top-secret docu-
ment quotes alleged 'top' scientists about an alleged asteroid 
('M-167') that will allegedly hit the Earth on 11 November 1993 
and 'could mean the end of life on Earth'. President Clinton is 
described as being kept 'constantly informed of the asteroid's 
position and speed'. Perhaps it was one of the items he discussed 
in his meeting with President Kennedy. Somehow, the fact that 
the Earth escaped this catastrophe did not merit even a retrospec-
tive paragraph after 11 November 1993 uneventfully passed. At 
least the headline writer's judgement not to burden the front page 
with the news of the end of the world was vindicated. 
Some see this as just a kind of fun. However, we live in a time 
when a real long-term statistical threat of an impact of an asteroid 
with the Earth has been identified. (This real science is of course 
the inspiration, if that's the word, of the WWN story.) Govern-
ment agencies are studying what to do about it. Stories like this 
suffuse the subject with apocalyptic exaggeration and whimsy, 
make it difficult for the public to distinguish real perils from 
tabloid fiction, and conceivably can impede our ability to take 
precautionary steps to mitigate the danger. 
The tabloids are often sued - sometimes by actors and actresses 
who stoutly deny they have performed loathsome acts - and large 
sums of money occasionally change hands. The tabloids must 
consider such suits as just one of the costs of doing a very 
profitable business. In their defence they often say that they are at 
the mercy of their writers and have no institutional responsibility 
to check out the truth of what they publish. Sal Ivone, the 
58 


The Man in the Moon and the Face on Mars 
managing editor of Weekly World News, discussing the stories he 
publishes, says 'For all I know, they could be the product of active 
imaginations. But because we're a tabloid, we don't have to 
question ourselves out of a story.' Scepticism doesn't sell news-
papers. Writers who have defected from the tabloids describe 
'creative' sessions in which writers and editors dream up stories 
and headlines out of whole cloth, the more outrageous the better. 
Out of their immense readership, are there not many who take 
the stories at face value, who believe the tabloids 'couldn't' print it 
if it wasn't so? Some readers I talk to insist they read them only for 
entertainment, just as they watch 'wrestling' on television, that 
they're not in the least taken in, that the tabloids are understood 
by publisher and reader alike to be whimsies that explore the 
absurd. They merely exist outside any universe burdened by rules 
of evidence. But my mail suggests that large numbers of Ameri-
cans take the tabloids very seriously indeed. 
In the 1990s the tabloid universe is expanding, voraciously 
gobbling up other media. Newspapers, magazines or television 
programmes that labour under prissy restraints imposed by what is 
actually known are outsold by media outlets with less scrupulous 
standards. We can see this in the new generation of acknowledged 
tabloid television, and increasingly in what passes for news and 
information programmes. 
Such reports persist and proliferate because they sell. And they 
sell, I think, because there are so many of us who want so badly to 
be jolted out of our humdrum lives, to rekindle that sense of 
wonder we remember from childhood, and also, for a few of the 
stories, to be able, really and truly, to believe in Someone older, 
smarter and wiser who is looking out for us. Faith is clearly not 
enough for many people. They crave hard evidence, scientific 
proof. They long for the scientific seal of approval, but are 
unwilling to put up with the rigorous standards of evidence that 
impart credibility to that seal. What a relief it would be: doubt 
reliably abolished! Then, the irksome burden of looking after 
ourselves would be lifted. We're worried - and for good reason -
about what it means for the human future if we have only 
ourselves to rely upon. 
These are the modern miracles, shamelessly vouched for by 
59 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
those who make them up from scratch, bypassing any formal 
sceptical scrutiny, and available at low cost in every supermarket, 
grocery store and convenience outlet in the land. One of the 
pretences of the tabloids is to make science, the very instrument of 
our disbelief, confirm our ancient faiths and effect a convergence 
of pseudoscience and pseudoreligion. 
By and large, scientists' minds are open when exploring new 
worlds. If we knew beforehand what we'd find, it would be 
unnecessary to go. In future missions to Mars or to the other 
fascinating worlds in our neck of the cosmic woods, surprises -
even some of mythic proportions - are possible, maybe even 
likely. But we humans have a talent for deceiving ourselves. 
Scepticism must be a component of the explorer's toolkit, or we 
will lose our way. There are wonders enough out there without 
our inventing any. 
60 


4 
Aliens 
'Truly, that which makes me believe there is no inhabitant 
on this sphere, is that it seems to me that no sensible being 
would be willing to live here.' 
'Well, then!' said Micromegas, 'perhaps the beings that 
inhabit it do not possess good sense.' 
One alien to another, 
on approaching the Earth, 
in Voltaire's Micromegas: 
A Philosophical History (1752) 
I
t's still dark out. You're lying in bed, fully awake. You discover 
you're utterly paralysed. You sense someone in the room. You 
try to cry out. You cannot. Several small grey beings, less than 
four feet tall, are standing at the foot of the bed. Their heads are 
pear-shaped, bald, and large for their bodies. Their eyes are 
enormous, their faces expressionless and identical. They wear 
tunics and boots. You hope this is only a dream. But as nearly as 
you can tell it's really happening. They lift you up and, eerily, they 
and you slip through the wall of your bedroom. You float out into 
the air. You rise high toward a metallic saucer-shaped spacecraft. 
Once inside, you are escorted into a medical examining room. A 
larger but similar being, evidently some kind of physician, takes 
over. What follows is even more terrifying. 
Your body is probed with instruments and machines, especially 
61 
