THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
immediately. Not explaining science seems to me perverse. 
When you're in love, you want to tell the world. This book is a 
personal statement, reflecting my lifelong love affair with 
science. 
But there's another reason: science is more than a body of 
knowledge; it is a way of thinking. I have a foreboding of an 
America in my children's or grandchildren's time - when the 
United States is a service and information economy; when nearly 
all the key manufacturing industries have slipped away to other 
countries; when awesome technological powers are in the hands of 
a very few, and no one representing the public interest can even 
grasp the issues; when the people have lost the ability to set their 
own agendas or knowledgeably question those in authority; when, 
clutching our crystals and nervously consulting our horoscopes, 
our critical faculties in decline, unable to distinguish between what 
feels good and what's true, we slide, almost without noticing, back 
into superstition and darkness. The dumbing down of America is 
most evident in the slow decay of substantive content in the 
enormously influential media, the 30-second sound bites (now 
down to 10 seconds or less), lowest common denominator 
programming, credulous presentations on pseudoscience and 
superstition, but especially a kind of celebration of ignorance. As 
I write, the number one video cassette rental in America is the 
movie Dumb and Dumber. Beavis and Butthead remains popular 
(and influential) with young TV viewers. The plain lesson is that 
study and learning - not just of science, but of anything - are 
avoidable, even undesirable. 
We've arranged a global civilization in which most crucial 
elements - transportation, communications, and all other indus-
tries; agriculture, medicine, education, entertainment, protecting 
the environment; and even the key democratic institution of 
voting - profoundly depend on science and technology. We have 
also arranged things so that almost no one understands science 
and technology. This is a prescription for disaster. We might get 
away with it for a while, but sooner or later this combustible 
mixture of ignorance and power is going to blow up in our faces. 
A Candle in the Dark is the title of a courageous, largely 
Biblically based, book by Thomas Ady, published in London in 
28 


Science and Hope 
1656, attacking the witch-hunts then in progress as a scam 'to 
delude the people'. Any illness or storm, anything out of the 
ordinary, was popularly attributed to witchcraft. Witches must 
exist, Ady quoted the 'witchmongers' as arguing, 'else how should 
these things be, or come to pass?' For much of our history, we 
were so fearful of the outside world, with its unpredictable 
dangers, that we gladly embraced anything that promised to 
soften or explain away the terror. Science is an attempt, largely 
successful, to understand the world, to get a grip on things, to get 
hold of ourselves, to steer a safe course. Microbiology and 
meteorology now explain what only a few centuries ago was 
considered sufficient cause to burn women to death. 
Ady also warned of the danger that 'the Nations [will] perish for 
lack of knowledge'. Avoidable human misery is more often caused 
not so much by stupidity as by ignorance, particularly our 
ignorance about ourselves. I worry that, especially as the millen-
nium edges nearer, pseudoscience and superstition will seem year 
by year more tempting, the siren song of unreason more sonorous 
and attractive. Where have we heard it before? Whenever our 
ethnic or national prejudices are aroused, in times of scarcity, 
during challenges to national self-esteem or nerve, when we 
agonize about our diminished cosmic place and purpose, or when 
fanaticism is bubbling up around us - then, habits of thought 
familiar from ages past reach for the controls. 
The candle flame gutters. Its little pool of light trembles. 
Darkness gathers. The demons begin to stir. 
There is much that science doesn't understand, many mysteries 
still to be resolved. In a Universe tens of billions of light years 
across and some ten or fifteen billion years old, this may be the 
case forever. We are constantly stumbling on surprises. Yet some 
New Age and religious writers assert that scientists believe that 
'what they find is all there is'. Scientists may reject mystic 
revelations for which there is no evidence except somebody's 
say-so, but they hardly believe their knowledge of Nature to be 
complete. 
Science is far from a perfect instrument of knowledge. It's just 
the best we have. In this respect, as in many others, it's like 
29 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
democracy. Science by itself cannot advocate courses of human 
action, but it can certainly illuminate the possible consequences of 
alternative courses of action. 
The scientific way of thinking is at once imaginative and 
disciplined. This is central to its success. Science invites us to let 
the facts in, even when they don't conform to our preconceptions. 
It counsels us to carry alternative hypotheses in our heads and see 
which best fit the facts. It urges on us a delicate balance between 
no-holds-barred openness to new ideas, however heretical, and 
the most rigorous sceptical scrutiny of everything - new ideas and 
established wisdom. This kind of thinking is also an essential tool 
for a democracy in an age of change. 
One of the reasons for its success is that science has built-in, 
error-correcting machinery at its very heart. Some may consider 
this an overbroad characterization, but to me every time we 
exercise self-criticism, every time we test our ideas against the 
outside world, we are doing science. When we are self-indulgent 
and uncritical, when we confuse hopes and facts, we slide into 
pseudoscience and superstition. 
Every time a scientific paper presents a bit of data, it's 
accompanied by an error bar - a quiet but insistent reminder that 
no knowledge is complete or perfect. It's a calibration of how 
much we trust what we think we know. If the error bars are small, 
the accuracy of our empirical knowledge is high; if the error bars 
are large, then so is the uncertainty in our knowledge. Except in 
pure mathematics nothing is known for certain (although much is 
certainly false). 
Moreover, scientists are usually careful to characterize the 
veridical status of their attempts to understand the world - ranging 
from conjectures and hypotheses, which are highly tentative, all 
the way up to laws of Nature which are repeatedly and systemati-
cally confirmed through many interrogations of how the world 
works. But even laws of Nature are not absolutely certain. There 
may be new circumstances never before examined - inside black 
holes, say, or within the electron, or close to the speed of light -
where even our vaunted laws of Nature break down and, however 
valid they may be in ordinary circumstances, need correction. 
Humans may crave absolute certainty; they may aspire to it; 
30 


Science and Hope 
they may pretend, as partisans of certain religions do, to have 
attained it. But the history of science - by far the most successful 
claim to knowledge accessible to humans - teaches that the most 
we can hope for is successive improvement in our understanding, 
learning from our mistakes, an asymptotic approach to the 
Universe, but with the proviso that absolute certainty will always 
elude us. 
We will always be mired in error. The most each generation can 
hope for is to reduce the error bars a little, and to add to the body 
of data to which error bars apply. The error bar is a pervasive, 
visible self-assessment of the reliability of our knowledge. You 
often see error bars in public opinion polls ('an uncertainty of plus 
or minus three per cent', say). Imagine a society in which every 
speech in the Congressional Record, every television commercial, 
every sermon had an accompanying error bar or its equivalent. 
One of the great commandments of science is, 'Mistrust argu-
ments from authority'. (Scientists, being primates, and thus given 
to dominance hierarchies, of course do not always follow this 
commandment.) Too many such arguments have proved too 
painfully wrong. Authorities must prove their contentions like 
everybody else. This independence of science, its occasional 
unwillingness to accept conventional wisdom, makes it dangerous 
to doctrines less self-critical, or with pretensions to certitude. 
Because science carries us toward an understanding of how the 
world is, rather than how we would wish it to be, its findings may 
not in all cases be immediately comprehensible or satisfying. It 
may take a little work to restructure our mindsets. Some of 
science is very simple. When it gets complicated, that's usually 
because the world is complicated - or because we're complicated. 
When we shy away from it because it seems too difficult (or 
because we've been taught so poorly), we surrender the ability to 
take charge of our future. We are disenfranchised. Our self-
confidence erodes. 
But when we pass beyond the barrier, when the findings and 
methods of science get through to us, when we understand and put 
this knowledge to use, many feel deep satisfaction. This is true for 
everyone, but especially for children - born with a zest for 
knowledge, aware that they must live in a future moulded by 
31 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
science, but so often convinced in their adolescence that science is 
not for them. I know personally, both from having science 
explained to me and from my attempts to explain it to others, how 
gratifying it is when we get it, when obscure terms suddenly take 
on meaning, when we grasp what all the fuss is about, when deep 
wonders are revealed. 
In its encounter with Nature, science invariably elicits a sense of 
reverence and awe. The very act of understanding is a celebration of 
joining, merging, even if on a very modest scale, with the magnifi-
cence of the Cosmos. And the cumulative worldwide build-up of 
knowledge over time converts science into something only a little 
short of a trans-national, trans-generational meta-mind. 
'Spirit' comes from the Latin word 'to breathe'. What we 
breathe is air, which is certainly matter, however thin. Despite 
usage to the contrary, there is no necessary implication in the 
word 'spiritual' that we are talking of anything other than matter 
(including the matter of which the brain is made), or anything 
outside the realm of science. On occasion, I will feel free to use 
the word. Science is not only compatible with spirituality; it is a 
profound source of spirituality. When we recognize our place in 
an immensity of light years and in the passage of ages, when we 
grasp the intricacy, beauty and subtlety of life, then that soaring 
feeling, that sense of elation and humility combined, is surely 
spiritual. So are our emotions in the presence of great art or music 
or literature, or of acts of exemplary selfless courage such as those 
of Mohandas Gandhi or Martin Luther King Jr. The notion that 
science and spirituality are somehow mutually exclusive does a 
disservice to both. 
Science may be hard to understand. It may challenge cherished 
beliefs. When its products are placed at the disposal of politicians 
or industrialists, it may lead to weapons of mass destruction and 
grave threats to the environment. But one thing you have to say 
about it: it delivers the goods. 
Not every branch of science can foretell the future - palaeontology 
can't - but many can and with stunning accuracy. If you want to 
know when the next eclipse of the Sun will be, you might try 
magicians or mystics, but you'll do much better with scientists. They 
32 


Science and Hope 
will tell you where on Earth to stand, when you have to be there, and 
whether it will be a partial eclipse, a total eclipse, or an annular 
eclipse. They can routinely predict a solar eclipse, to the minute, a 
millennium in advance. You can go to the witch doctor to lift the 
spell that causes your pernicious anaemia, or you can take vitamin 
Bl2. If you want to save your child from polio, you can pray or you 
can inoculate. If you're interested in the sex of your unborn child, 
you can consult plumb-bob danglers all you want (left-right, a boy; 
forward-back, a girl - or maybe it's the other way around), but 
they'll be right, on average, only one time in two. If you want real 
accuracy (here, 99 per cent accuracy), try amniocentesis and sono-
grams. Try science. 
Think of how many religions attempt to validate themselves 
with prophecy. Think of how many people rely on these prophe-
cies, however vague, however unfulfilled, to support or prop up 
their beliefs. Yet has there ever been a religion with the prophetic 
accuracy and reliability of science? There isn't a religion on the 
planet that doesn't long for a comparable ability - precise, and 
repeatedly demonstrated before committed sceptics - to foretell 
future events. No other human institution comes close. 
Is this worshipping at the altar of science? Is this replacing one 
faith by another, equally arbitrary? In my view, not at all. The 
directly observed success of science is the reason I advocate its 
use. If something else worked better, I would advocate the 
something else. Does science insulate itself from philosophical 
criticism? Does it define itself as having a monopoly on the 
'truth'? Think again of that eclipse a thousand years in the future. 
Compare as many doctrines as you can think of, note what 
predictions they make of the future, which ones are vague, which 
ones are precise, and which doctrines - every one of them subject 
to human fallibility - have error-correcting mechanisms built in. 
Take account of the fact that not one of them is perfect. Then 
simply pick the one that in a fair comparison works best (as 
opposed to feels) best. If different doctrines are superior in quite 
separate and independent fields, we are of course free to choose 
several - but not if they contradict one another. Far from being 
idolatry, this is the means by which we can distinguish the false 
idols from the real thing. 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
Again, the reason science works so well is partly that built-in 
error-correcting machinery. There are no forbidden questions in 
science, no matters too sensitive or delicate to be probed, no 
sacred truths. That openness to new ideas, combined with the 
most rigorous, sceptical scrutiny of all ideas, sifts the wheat from 
the chaff. It makes no difference how smart, august or beloved 
you are. You must prove your case in the face of determined, 
expert criticism. Diversity and debate are valued. Opinions are 
encouraged to contend - substantively and in depth. 
The process of science may sound messy and disorderly. In a 
way, it is. If you examine science in its everyday aspect, of course 
you find that scientists run the gamut of human emotion, person-
ality and character. But there's one facet that is really striking to 
the outsider, and that is the gauntlet of criticism considered 
acceptable or even desirable. There is much warm and inspired 
encouragement of apprentice scientists by their mentors. But the 
poor graduate student at his or her PhD orai exam is subjected to 
a withering crossfire of questions from the very professors who 
have the candidate's future in their grasp. Naturally the students 
are nervous; who wouldn't be? True, they've prepared for it for 
years. But they understand that at this critical moment, they have 
to be able to answer searching questions posed by experts. So in 
preparing to defend their theses, they must practise a very useful 
habit of thought: they must anticipate questions. They have to ask: 
where in my dissertation is there a weakness that someone else 
might find? I'd better identify it before they do. 
You sit in at contentious scientific meetings. You find university 
colloquia in which the speaker has hardly gotten thirty seconds 
into the talk before there are devastating questions and comments 
from the audience. You examine the conventions in which a 
written report is submitted to a scientific journal for possible 
publication, then is conveyed by the editor to anonymous referees 
whose job it is to ask: did the author do anything stupid? Is there 
anything in here that is sufficiently interesting to be published? 
What are the deficiencies of this paper? Have the main results 
been found by anybody else? Is the argument adequate, or should 
the paper be resubmitted after the author has actually demon-
strated what is here only speculated on? And it's anonymous: the 
34 


Science and Hope 
author doesn't know who the critics are. This is the everyday 
expectation in the scientific community. 
Why do we put up with it? Do we like to be criticized? No, no 
scientist enjoys it. Every scientist feels a proprietary affection for 
his or her ideas and findings. Even so, you don't reply to critics, 
wait a minute; this is a really good idea; I'm very fond of it; it's 
done you no harm; please leave it alone. Instead, the hard but just 
rule is that if the ideas don't work, you must throw them away. 
Don't waste neurons on what doesn't work. Devote those neurons 
to new ideas that better explain the data. The British physicist 
Michael Faraday warned of the powerful temptation 
to seek for such evidence and appearances as are in the 
favour of our desires, and to disregard those which oppose 
them . . . We receive as friendly that which agrees with [us], 
we resist with dislike that which opposes us; whereas the very 
reverse is required by every dictate of common sense. 
Valid criticism does you a favour. 
Some people consider science arrogant - especially when it 
purports to contradict beliefs of long standing or when it intro-
duces bizarre concepts that seem contradictory to common sense; 
like an earthquake that rattles our faith in the very ground we're 
standing on, challenging our accustomed beliefs, shaking the 
doctrines we have grown to rely upon, can be profoundly disturb-
ing. Nevertheless, I maintain that science is part and parcel 
humility. Scientists do not seek to impose their needs and wants 
on Nature, but instead humbly interrogate Nature and take 
seriously what they find. We are aware that revered scientists have 
been wrong. We understand human imperfection. We insist on 
independent and - to the extent possible - quantitative verifica-
tion of proposed tenets of belief. We are constantly prodding, 
challenging, seeking contradictions or small, persistent residual 
errors, proposing alternative explanations, encouraging heresy. 
We give our highest rewards to those who convincingly disprove 
established beliefs. 
Here's one of many examples: the laws of motion and the 
inverse square law of gravitation associated with the name of Isaac 
35 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
Newton are properly considered among the crowning achieve-
ments of the human species. Three hundred years later we use 
Newtonian dynamics to predict those eclipses. Years after launch, 
billions of miles from Earth (with only tiny corrections from 
Einstein), the spacecraft beautifully arrives at a predetermined 
point in the orbit of the target world, just as the world comes 
ambling by. The accuracy is astonishing. Plainly, Newton knew 
what he was doing. 
But scientists have not been content to leave well enough alone. 
They have persistently sought chinks in the Newtonian armour. 
At high speeds and strong gravities, Newtonian physics breaks 
down. This is one of the great findings of Albert Einstein's Special 
and General Relativity, and is one of the reasons his memory is so 
greatly honoured. Newtonian physics is valid over a wide range of 
conditions including those of everyday life. But in certain circum-
stances highly unusual for human beings - we are not, after all, in 
the habit of travelling near light speed - it simply doesn't give the 
right answer; it does not conform to observations of Nature. 
Special and General Relativity are indistinguishable from Newto-
nian physics in its realm of validity, but make very different 
predictions - predictions in excellent accord with observation - in 
those other regimes (high speed, strong gravity). Newtonian 
physics turns out to be an approximation to the truth, good in 
circumstances with which we are routinely familiar, bad in others. 
It is a splendid and justly celebrated accomplishment of the 
human mind, but it has its limitations. 
However, in accord with our understanding of human fallibility, 
heeding the counsel that we may asymptotically approach the 
truth but will never fully reach it, scientists are today investigating 
regimes in which General Relativity may break down. For exam-
ple, General Relativity predicts a startling phenomenon called 
gravitational waves. They have never been detected directly. But 
if they do not exist, there is something fundamentally wrong with 
General Relativity. Pulsars are rapidly rotating neutron stars 
whose flicker rates can now be measured to fifteen decimal places. 
Two very dense pulsars in orbit around each other are predicted to 
radiate copious quantities of gravitational waves, which will in 
time slightly alter the orbits and rotation periods of the two stars. 


Science and Hope 
Joseph Taylor and Russell Hulse of Princeton University have 
used this method to test the predictions of General Relativity in a 
wholly novel way. For all they knew, the results would be 
inconsistent with General Relativity and they would have over-
turned one of the chief pillars of modern physics. Not only were 
they willing to challenge General Relativity, they were widely 
encouraged to do so. As it turns out, the observations of binary 
pulsars give a precise verification of the predictions of General 
Relativity, and for this Taylor and Hulse were co-recipients of the 
1993 Nobel Prize in Physics. In diverse ways, many other physi-
cists are testing General Relativity, for example by attempting 
directly to detect the elusive gravitational waves. They hope to 
strain the theory to the breaking point and discover whether a 
regime of Nature exists in which Einstein's great advance in 
understanding in turn begins to fray. 
These efforts will continue as long as there are scientists. 
General Relativity is certainly an inadequate description of 
Nature at the quantum level, but even if that were not the case, 
even if General Relativity were everywhere and forever valid, 
what better way of convincing ourselves of its validity than a 
concerted effort to discover its failings and limitations? 
This is one of the reasons that the organized religions do not 
inspire me with confidence. Which leaders of the major faiths 
acknowledge that their beliefs might be incomplete or erroneous 
and establish institutes to uncover possible doctrinal deficiencies? 
Beyond the test of everyday living, who is systematically testing 
the circumstances in which traditional religious teachings may no 
longer apply? (It is certainly conceivable that doctrines and ethics 
that may have worked fairly well in patriarchal or patristic or 
medieval times might be thoroughly invalid in the very different 
world we inhabit today.) What sermons even-handedly examine 
the God hypothesis? What rewards are religious sceptics given by 
the established religions - or, for that matter, social and economic 
sceptics by the society in which they swim? 
Science, Ann Druyan notes, is forever whispering in our ears, 
'Remember, you're very new at this. You might be mistaken. 
You've been wrong before.' Despite all the talk of humility, show 
me something comparable in religion. Scripture is said to be 
37 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
divinely inspired - a phrase with many meanings. But what if it's 
simply made up by fallible humans? Miracles are attested, but 
what if they're instead some mix of charlatanry, unfamiliar states 
of consciousness, misapprehensions of natural phenomena and 
mental illness? No contemporary religion and no New Age belief 
seems to me to take sufficient account of the grandeur, magnifi-
cence, subtlety and intricacy of the Universe revealed by science. 
The fact that so little of the findings of modern science is 
prefigured in Scripture to my mind casts further doubt on its 
divine inspiration. 
But of course I might be wrong. 
Read the following two paragraphs - not to understand the 
science described, but to get a feeling for the author's style of 
thinking. He is facing anomalies, apparent paradoxes in physics; 
'asymmetries' he calls them. What can we learn from them? 
It is known that Maxwell's electrodynamics - as usually 
understood at the present time - when applied to moving 
bodies, leads to asymmetries which do not appear to be 
inherent in the phenomena. Take, for example, the recipro-
cal electrodynamic action of a magnet and a conductor. The 
observable phenomenon here depends only on the relative 
motion of the conductor and the magnet, whereas the cus-
tomary view draws a sharp distinction between the two cases 
in which either the one or the other of these bodies is in 
motion. For if the magnet is in motion and the conductor at 
rest, there arises in the neighbourhood of the magnet an 
electric field with a certain definite energy, producing a 
current at the places where parts of the conductor are 
situated. But if the magnet is stationary and the conductor in 
motion, no electric field arises in the neighbourhood of the 
magnet. In the conductor, however, we find an electromotive 
force, to which in itself there is no corresponding energy, but 
which gives rise - assuming equality of relative motion in the 
two cases discussed - to electric currents of the same path and 
intensity as those produced by the electric forces in the 
former case. 
38 


Science and Hope 
Examples of this sort, together with the unsuccessful 
attempts to discover any motion of the earth relative to the 
'ether', suggest that the phenomena of electrodynamics as 
well as of mechanics possess no properties corresponding to 
the idea of absolute rest. They suggest rather that, as has 
already been shown to the first order of small quantities, the 
same laws of electrodynamics and optics will be valid for all 
frames of reference for which the equations of mechanics 
hold good. 
What is the author trying to tell us here? I'll try to explain the 
background later in this book. For now, we can perhaps recognize 
that the language is spare, technical, cautious, clear, and not a jot 
more complicated than it need be. You would not offhand guess 
from how it's phrased (or from its unostentatious title, 'On the 
Electrodynamics of Moving Bodies') that this article represents 
the crucial arrival of the theory of Special Relativity into the 
world, the gateway to the triumphant announcement of the 
equivalence of mass and energy, the deflation of the conceit that 
our small world occupies some 'privileged reference frame' in the 
Universe, and in several different ways an epochal event in human 
history. The opening words of Albert Einstein's 1905 paper are 
characteristic of the scientific report. It is refreshingly unselfserv-
ing, circumspect, understated. Contrast its restrained tone with, 
say, the products of modern advertising, political speeches, 
authoritative theological pronouncements - or for that matter the 
blurb on the cover of this book. 
Notice how Einstein's paper begins by trying to make sense of 
experimental results. Wherever possible, scientists experiment. 
Which experiments suggest themselves often depends on which 
theories currently prevail. Scientists are intent on testing those 
theories to the breaking point. They do not trust what is intuitively 
obvious. That the Earth is flat was once obvious. That heavy 
bodies fall faster than light ones was once obvious. That blood-
sucking leeches cure most diseases was once obvious. That some 
people are naturally and by divine decree slaves was once obvious. 
That there is such a place as the centre of the Universe, and that 
the Earth sits in that exalted spot was once obvious. That there is 
39 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
an absolute standard of rest was once obvious. The truth may be 
puzzling or counterintuitive. It may contradict deeply held beliefs. 
Experiment is how we get a handle on it. 
At a dinner many decades ago, the physicist Robert W. 
Wood was asked to respond to the toast, 'To physics and 
metaphysics'. By 'metaphysics', people then meant something 
like philosophy, or truths you could recognize just by thinking 
about them. They could also have included pseudoscience. 
Wood answered along these lines: the physicist has an idea. The 
more he thinks it through, the more sense it seems to make. He 
consults the scientific literature. The more he reads, the more 
promising the idea becomes. Thus prepared, he goes to the 
laboratory and devises an experiment to test it. The experiment 
is painstaking. Many possibilities are checked. The accuracy of 
measurement is refined, the error bars reduced. He lets the 
chips fall where they may. He is devoted only to what the 
experiment teaches. At the end of all this work, through careful 
experimentation, the idea is found to be worthless. So the 
physicist discards it, frees his mind from the clutter of error, 
and moves on to something else.* 
The difference between physics and metaphysics, Wood con-
cluded as he raised his glass high, is not that the practitioners of 
one are smarter than the practitioners of the other. The difference 
is that the metaphysicist has no laboratory. 
For me, there are four main reasons for a concerted effort to 
convey science - on radio and TV, in movies, newspapers, books, 
computer programs, theme parks and classrooms - to every 
citizen. In all uses of science, it is insufficient - indeed it is 
dangerous - to produce only a small, highly competent, well-
rewarded priesthood of professionals. Instead, some fundamental 
understanding of the findings and methods of science must be 
available on the broadest scale. 
* As the pioneering physicist Benjamin Franklin put it, 'In going on with these 
experiments, how many pretty systems do we build, which we soon find 
ourselves obliged to destroy?' At the very least, he thought, the experience 
sufficed to 'help to make a vain Man humble'. 
40 


Science and Hope 
• Despite plentiful opportunities for misuse, science can be the 
golden road out of poverty and backwardness for emerging 
nations. It makes national economies and the global civilization 
run. Many nations understand this. It is why so many graduate 
students in science and engineering at American graduate 
schools - still the best in the world - are from other countries. 
The corollary, one that the United States sometimes fails to 
grasp, is that abandoning science is the road back into poverty 
and backwardness. 
• Science alerts us to the perils introduced by our world-altering 
technologies, especially to the global environment on which our 
lives depend. Science provides an essential early warning 
system. 
• Science teaches us about the deepest issues of origins, natures 
and fates-of our species, of life, of our planet, of the Universe. 
For the first time in human history we are able to secure a real 
understanding of some of these matters. Every culture on Earth 
has addressed such issues and valued their importance. All of 
us feel goosebumps when we approach these grand questions. 
In the long run, the greatest gift of science may be in teaching 
us, in ways no other human endeavour has been able, some-
thing about our cosmic context, about where, when and who we 
are. 
• The values of science and the values of democracy are concord-
ant, in many cases indistinguishable. Science and democracy 
began - in their civilized incarnations - in the same time and 
place, Greece in the seventh and sixth centuries BC. Science 
confers power on anyone who takes the trouble to learn it 
(although too many have been systematically prevented from 
doing so). Science thrives on, indeed requires, the free 
exchange of ideas; its values are antithetical to secrecy. Science 
holds to no special vantage points or privileged positions. Both 
science and democracy encourage unconventional opinions and 
vigorous debate. Both demand adequate reason, coherent 
argument, rigorous standards of evidence and honesty. Science 
is a way to call the bluff of those who only pretend to 
knowledge. It is a bulwark against mysticism, against supersti-
tion, against religion misapplied to where it has no business 
41 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
being. If we're true to its values, it can tell us when we're being 
lied to. It provides a mid-course correction to our mistakes. 
The more widespread its language, rules and methods, the 
better chance we have of preserving what Thomas Jefferson 
and his colleagues had in mind. But democracy can also be 
subverted more thoroughly through the products of science 
than any pre-industrial demagogue ever dreamed. 
Finding the occasional straw of truth awash in a great ocean of 
confusion and bamboozle requires vigilance, dedication and cour-
age. But if we don't practise these tough habits of thought, we 
cannot hope to solve the truly serious problems that face us and 
we risk becoming a nation of suckers, a world of suckers, up for 
grabs by the next charlatan who saunters along. 
An extraterrestrial being, newly arrived on earth - scrutinizing 
what we mainly present to our children on television and radio 
and in movies, newspapers, magazines, comics and many books-
might easily conclude that we are intent on teaching them murder, 
rape, cruelty, superstition, credulity and consumerism. We keep 
at it, and through constant repetition many of them finally get it. 
What kind of society could we create if, instead, we drummed into 
them science and a sense of hope? 
42 


The Man in the Moon 
and the Face on Mars 
The moon leaps 
In the Great River's current . . . 
Floating on the wind, 
What do I resemble? 
Du Fu, 'Travelling at Night' 
(China, Tang Dynasty, 765) 
E
ach field of science has its own complement of pseudo-
science. Geophysicists have flat Earths, hollow Earths, 
Earths with wildly bobbing axes to contend with, rapidly rising 
and sinking continents, plus earthquake prophets. Botanists 
have plants whose passionate emotional lives can be monitored 
with lie detectors, anthropologists have surviving ape-men, 
zoologists have extant dinosaurs, and evolutionary biologists 
have Biblical literalists snapping at their flanks. Archaeologists 
have ancient astronauts, forged runes and spurious statuary. 
Physicists have perpetual motion machines, an army of amateur 
relativity disprovers, and perhaps cold fusion. Chemists still 
have alchemy. Psychologists have much of psychoanalysis and 
almost all of parapsychology. Economists have long-range 
economic forecasting. Meteorologists, so far, have long-range 
weather forecasting, as in the sunspot-oriented Farmer's Alma-
nac (although long-term climate forecasting is another matter). 
Astronomy has, as its most prominent pseudoscience, astrology 
43 
3 
