Antiscience 
comeuppance. Science envy could be transcended. Those who 
have pursued other paths to knowledge, those who have secretly 
harboured beliefs that science has scorned, could now have their 
place in the Sun. 
The rate of change in science is responsible for some of the fire 
it draws. Just when we've finally understood something the 
scientists are talking about, they tell us it isn't any longer true. 
And even if it is, there's a slew of new things - things we never 
heard of, things difficult to believe, things with disquieting 
implications - that they claim to have discovered recently. Scien-
tists can be perceived as toying with us, as wanting to overturn 
everything, as socially dangerous. 
Edward U. Condon was a distinguished American physicist, a 
pioneer in quantum mechanics, a participant in the development 
of radar and nuclear weapons in World War II, research director 
of Corning Glass, director of the National Bureau of Standards, 
and president of the American Physical Society (as well as, late in 
his life, professor of physics at the University of Colorado, where 
he directed a controversial Air Force-funded scientific study of 
UFOs). He was one of the physicists whose loyalty to the United 
States was challenged by members of Congress - including 
Congressman Richard M. Nixon, who called for the revocation of 
his security clearance - in the late 1940s and early 1950s. The 
superpatriotic 
chairman 
of 
the 
House 
Committee 
on 
Un-American Activities (HCUA), Rep. J. Parnell Thomas, 
would call the physicist 'Dr Condom', the 'weakest link' in 
American security, and - at one point - the 'missing link'. His 
view on Constitutional guarantees can be gleaned from the 
following response to a witness's lawyer: 'The rights you have are 
the rights given you by this Committee. We will determine what 
rights you have and what rights you have not got before the 
Committee.' 
Albert Einstein publicly called on all those summoned before 
HCUA to refuse to cooperate. In 1948, President Harry Truman 
at the Annual Meeting of the American Association for the 
Advancement of Science, and with Condon sitting beside him, 
denounced Rep. Thomas and HCUA on the grounds that vital 
scientific research 'may be made impossible by the creation of an 
235 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
atmosphere in which no man feels safe against the public airing of 
unfounded rumors, gossip and vilification'. He called HCUA's 
activities 'the most un-American thing we have to contend with 
today. It is the climate of a totalitarian country.'* 
The playwright Arthur Miller wrote The Crucible, about the 
Salem Witch Trials, in this period. When the drama opened in 
Europe, Miller was denied a passport by the State Department on 
the grounds that it was not in the best interests of the United 
States for him to travel abroad. On opening night in Brussels the 
play was greeted with tumultuous applause, whereupon the US 
Ambassador stood up and took a bow. Brought before HCUA, 
Miller was chastised for the suggestion that Congressional investi-
gations might have something in common with witch trials; he 
replied, 'The comparison is inevitable, sir.' Thomas was shortly 
afterwards thrown in jail for fraud. 
One summer in graduate school I was a student of Condon's. I 
remember vividly his account of being brought up before some 
loyalty review board: 
'Dr Condon, it says here that you have been at the forefront of a 
revolutionary movement in physics called' - and here the inquisitor 
read the words slowly and carefully - 'quantum mechanics. It strikes 
this hearing that if you could be at the forefront of one revolutionary 
movement. . . you could be at the forefront of another.' 
Condon, quick on his feet, replied that the accusation was 
untrue. He was not a revolutionary in physics. He raised his right 
hand: 'I believe in Archimedes' Principle, formulated in the third 
century BC. I believe in Kepler's laws of planetary motion, 
discovered in the seventeenth century. I believe in Newton's 
laws . . .' And on he went, invoking the illustrious names of 
Bernoulli, Fourier, Ampere, Boltzmann and Maxwell. This physi-
cist's catechism did not gain him much. The tribunal did not 
* But Truman's responsibility for the witch-hunt atmosphere of the late 1940s 
and early 1950s is considerable. His 1947 Executive Order 9835 authorized 
inquiries into the opinions and associates of all federal employees, without the 
right to confront the accuser or even, in most cases, to know what the 
accusation was. Those found wanting were fired. His Attorney General, Tom 
Clark, established a list of 'subversive' organizations so wide that at one time it 
included Consumer's Union. 
236 


Antiscience 
appreciate humour in so serious a matter. But the most they were 
able to pin on Condon, as I recall, was that in high school he had a 
job delivering a socialist newspaper door-to-door on his bicycle. 
Imagine you seriously want to understand what quantum mechan-
ics is about. There is a mathematical underpinning that you must 
first acquire, mastery of each mathematical subdiscipline leading 
you to the threshold of the next. In turn you must learn arithme-
tic, Euclidian geometry, high school algebra, differential and 
integral calculus, ordinary and partial differential equations, 
vector calculus, certain special functions of mathematical physics, 
matrix algebra, and group theory. For most physics students, this 
might occupy them from, say, third grade to early graduate school 
- roughly fifteen years. Such a course of study does not actually 
involve learning any quantum mechanics, but merely establishing 
the mathematical framework required to approach it deeply. 
The job of the popularizer of science, trying to get across some 
idea of quantum mechanics to a general audience that has not 
gone through these initiation rites, is daunting. Indeed, there are 
no successful popularizations of quantum mechanics in my opin-
ion, partly for this reason. These mathematical complexities are 
compounded by the fact that quantum theory is so resolutely 
counterintuitive. Common sense is almost useless in approaching 
it. It's no good, Richard Feynman once said, asking why it is that 
way. No one knows why it is that way. That's just the way it is. 
Now suppose we were to approach some obscure religion or 
New Age doctrine or shamanistic belief system sceptically. We 
have an open mind; we understand there's something interesting 
here; we introduce ourselves to the practitioner and ask for an 
intelligible summary. Instead we are told that it's intrinsically too 
difficult to be explained simply, that it's replete with 'mysteries', 
but if we're willing to become acolytes for fifteen years, at the end 
of that time we might begin to be prepared to consider the subject 
seriously. Most of us, I think, would say that we simply don't have 
the time; and many would suspect that the business about fifteen 
years just to get to the threshold of understanding is evidence that 
the whole subject is a bamboozle: if it's too hard for us to 
understand, doesn't it follow that it's too hard for us to criticize 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
knowledgeably? Then the bamboozle has free rein. 
So how is shamanistic or theological or New Age doctrine differ-
ent from quantum mechanics? The answer is that even if we cannot 
understand it, we can verify that quantum mechanics works. We can 
compare the quantitative predictions of quantum theory with the 
measured wavelengths of spectral lines of the chemical elements, the 
behaviour of semiconductors and liquid helium, microprocessors, 
which kinds of molecules form from their constituent atoms, the 
existence and properties of white dwarf stars, what happens in 
masers and lasers, and which materials are susceptible to which kinds 
of magnetism. We don't have to understand the theory to see what it 
predicts. We don't have to be accomplished physicists to read what 
the experiments reveal. In every one of these instances, as in many 
others, the predictions of quantum mechanics are strikingly, and to 
high accuracy, confirmed. 
But the shaman tells us that his doctrine is true because it too 
works - not on arcane matters of mathematical physics but on what 
really counts: he can cure people. Very well, then, let's accumulate 
the statistics on shamanistic cures, and see if they work better than 
placebos. If they do, let's willingly grant that there's something here 
- even if it's only that some illnesses are psychogenic, and can be 
cured or mitigated by the right attitudes and mental states. We can 
also compare the efficacy of alternative shamanistic systems. 
Whether the shaman grasps why his cures work is another story. 
In quantum mechanics we have a purported understanding of 
Nature on the basis of which, step by step and quantitatively, we 
make predictions about what will happen if a certain experiment, 
never before attempted, is carried out. If the experiment bears out 
the prediction - especially if it does so numerically and precisely -
we have confidence that we knew what we were doing. There are 
at best few examples with this character among shamans, priests 
and New Age gurus. 
Another important distinction was suggested in Reason and 
Nature, the 1931 book by Morris Cohen, a celebrated philosopher 
of science: 
To be sure, the vast majority of people who are untrained can 
accept the results of science only on authority. But there is 
238 


Antiscience 
obviously an important difference between an establishment 
that is open and invites every one to come, study its methods, 
and suggest improvement, and one that regards the question-
ing of its credentials as due to wickedness of heart, such as 
[Cardinal] Newman attributed to those who questioned the 
infallibility of the Bible . . . Rational science treats its credit 
notes as always redeemable on demand, while non-rational 
authoritarianism regards the demand for the redemption of 
its paper as a disloyal lack of faith. 
The myths and folklore of many pre-modern cultures have 
explanatory or at least mnemonic value. In stories that everyone 
can appreciate and even witness, they encode the environment. 
Which constellations are rising or the orientation of the Milky 
Way on a given day of the year can be remembered by a story 
about lovers reunited or a canoe negotiating the sacred river. 
Since recognizing the sky is essential for planting and reaping and 
following the game, such stories have important practical value. 
They can also be helpful as psychological projective tests or as 
reassurances of humanity's place in the Universe. But that doesn't 
mean that the Milky Way really is a river or that a canoe really is 
traversing it before our eyes. 
Quinine comes from an infusion of the bark of a particular tree 
from the Amazon rain forest. How did pre-modern people ever 
discover that a tea made from this tree, of all the plants in the 
forest, would relieve the symptoms of malaria? They must have 
tried every tree and every plant - roots, stems, bark, leaves -
tried chewing on them, mashing them up, making an infusion. 
This constitutes a massive set of scientific experiments continu-
ing over generations, experiments that moreover could not be 
duplicated today for reasons of medical ethics. Think of how 
many bark infusions from other trees must have been useless, 
or made the patient retch or even die. In such a case, the healer 
chalks these potential medicines off the list, and moves on to 
the next. The data of ethnopharmacology may not be systemati-
cally or even consciously acquired. By trial and error, though, 
and carefully remembering what worked, eventually they get 
there - using the rich molecular riches in the plant kingdom 
239 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
to accumulate a pharmacopoeia that works. Absolutely essen-
tial, life-saving information can be acquired from folk medicine 
and in no other way. We should be doing much more than we 
are to mine the treasures in such folk knowledge worldwide. 
Likewise for, say, predicting the weather in a valley near the 
Orinoco: it is perfectly possible that pre-industrial peoples have 
noted over the millennia regularities, premonitory indications, 
cause-and-effect relationships at a particular geographic locale of 
which professors of meteorology and climatology in some distant 
university are wholly ignorant. But it does not follow that the 
shamans of such cultures are able to predict the weather in Paris 
or Tokyo, much less the global climate. 
Certain kinds of folk knowledge are valid and priceless. Others 
are at best metaphors and codifiers. Ethnomedicine, yes; astro-
physics, no. It is certainly true that all beliefs and all myths are 
worthy of a respectful hearing. It is not true that all folk beliefs are 
equally valid if we're talking not about an internal mindset, but 
about understanding the external reality. 
For centuries, science has been under a line of attack that, rather 
than pseudoscience, can be called antiscience. Science, and aca-
demic scholarship in general, the contention these days goes, is 
too subjective. Some even allege it's entirely subjective, as is, they 
say, history. History generally is written by the victors to justify 
their actions, to arouse patriotic fervour, and to suppress the 
legitimate claims of the vanquished. When no overwhelming 
victory takes place, each side writes self-promotional accounts of 
what really happened. English histories castigated the French, and 
vice versa; US histories until very recently ignored the de facto 
policies of lebensraum and genocide toward Native Americans; 
Japanese histories of the events leading to World War II minimize 
Japanese atrocities, and suggest that their chief purpose was 
altruistically to free East Asia from European and American 
colonialism; Poland was invaded in 1939, Nazi historians asserted, 
because Poland, ruthless and unprovoked, attacked Germany; 
Soviet historians pretended that the Soviet troops that put down 
the Hungarian (1956) and Czech (1968) Revolutions were invited 
in by general acclamation in the invaded nations rather than by 
240 


Antiscience 
Russian stooges; Belgian histories tend to gloss over the atrocities 
committed when the Congo was a private fiefdom of the King of 
Belgium; Chinese historians are strangely oblivious of the tens of 
millions of deaths caused by Mao Zedong's 'Great Leap Forward'; 
that God condones and even advocates slavery was repeatedly 
argued from the pulpit and in the schools in Christian slave-
holding societies, but Christian polities that have freed their slaves 
are mostly silent on the matter; as brilliant, widely read and sober 
a historian as Edward Gibbon would not meet with Benjamin 
Franklin when they found themselves at the same English country 
inn, because of the late unpleasantness of the American Revolu-
tion. (Franklin then volunteered source material to Gibbon when 
he turned, as Franklin was sure he soon would, from the decline 
and fall of the Roman Empire to the decline and fall of the British 
Empire. Franklin was right about the British Empire, but his 
timetable was about two centuries early.) 
These histories have traditionally been written by admired 
academic historians, often pillars of the establishment. Local 
dissent is given short shrift. Objectivity is sacrificed in the service 
of higher goals. From this doleful fact, some have gone so far as to 
conclude that there is no such thing as history, no possibility of 
reconstructing the actual events; that all we have are biased 
self-justifications; and that this conclusion stretches from history 
to all of knowledge, science included. 
And yet who would deny that there were actual sequences of 
historical events, with real causal threads, even if our ability to 
reconstruct them in their full weave is limited, even if the signal is 
awash in an ocean of self-congratulatory noise? The danger of 
subjectivity and prejudice has been apparent from the beginning 
of history. Thucydides warned against it. Cicero wrote 
The first law is that the historian shall never dare to set down 
what is false; the second, that he shall never dare to conceal 
the truth; the third, that there shall be no suspicion in his 
work of either favouritism or prejudice. 
Lucian of Samosata, in How History Should Be Written, published 
in the year 170, urged 'The historian should be fearless and 
241 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
incorruptible; a man of independence, loving frankness and truth'. 
It is the responsibility of those historians with integrity to try to 
reconstruct that actual sequence of events, however disappointing 
or alarming it may be. Historians learn to suppress their natural 
indignation about affronts to their nations and acknowledge, 
where appropriate, that their national leaders may have commit-
ted atrocious crimes. They may have to dodge outraged patriots as 
an occupational hazard. They recognize that accounts of events 
have passed through biased human filters, and that historians 
themselves have biases. Those who want to know what actually 
happened will become fully conversant with the views of histori-
ans in other, once adversary, nations. All that can be hoped for is 
a set of successive approximations: by slow steps, and through 
improving self-knowledge, our understanding of historical events 
improves. 
Something similar is true in science. We have biases; we breathe 
in the prevailing prejudices from our surroundings like everyone 
else. Scientists have on occasion given aid and comfort to a variety 
of noxious doctrines (including the supposed 'superiority' of one 
ethnic group or gender over another from measurements of brain 
size or skull bumps or IQ tests). Scientists are often reluctant to 
offend the rich and powerful. Occasionally, a few of them cheat 
and steal. Some worked - many without a trace of moral regret -
for the Nazis. Scientists also exhibit biases connected with human 
chauvinisms and with our intellectual limitations. As I've dis-
cussed earlier, scientists are also responsible for deadly technolo-
gies - sometimes inventing them on purpose, sometimes being 
insufficiently cautious about unintended side-effects. But it is also 
scientists who, in most such cases, have blown the whistle alerting 
us to the danger. 
Scientists make mistakes. Accordingly, it is the job of the 
scientist to recognize our weakness, to examine the widest range 
of opinions, to be ruthlessly self-critical. Science is a collective 
enterprise with the error-correction machinery often running 
smoothly. It has an overwhelming advantage over history, 
because in science we can do experiments. If you are unsure of the 
negotiations leading to the Treaty of Paris in 1814-15, replaying 
the events is an unavailable option. You can only dig into old 
242 


Antiscience 
records. You cannot even ask questions of the participants. Every 
one of them is dead. 
But for many questions in science, you can rerun the event as 
many times as you like, examine it in new ways, test a wide range 
of alternative hypotheses. When new tools are devised, you can 
perform the experiment again and see what emerges from your 
improved sensitivity. In those historical sciences where you cannot 
arrange a rerun, you can examine related cases and begin to 
recognize their common components. We can't make stars 
explode at our convenience, nor can we repeatedly evolve through 
many trials a mammal from its ancestors. But we can simulate 
some of the physics of supernova explosions in the laboratory, and 
we can compare in staggering detail the genetic instructions of 
mammals and reptiles. 
The claim is also sometimes made that science is as arbitrary or 
irrational as all other claims to knowledge, or that reason itself is 
an illusion. The American revolutionary, Ethan Allen - leader of 
the Green Mountain Boys in their capture of Fort Ticonderoga -
had some words on this subject: 
Those who invalidate reason ought seriously to consider 
whether they argue against reason with or without reason; if 
with reason, then they establish the principle that they are 
laboring to dethrone: but if they argue without reason 
(which, in order to be consistent with themselves they must 
do), they are out of reach of rational conviction, nor do they 
deserve a rational argument. 
The reader can judge the depth of this argument. 
Anyone who witnesses the advance of science first-hand sees an 
intensely personal undertaking. There are always a few - driven by 
simple wonder and great integrity, or by frustration with the inad-
equacies of existing knowledge, or simply upset with themselves for 
their imagined inability to understand what everyone else can - who 
proceed to ask the devastating key questions. A few saintly person-
alities stand out amidst a roiling sea of jealousies, ambition, backbit-
ing, suppression of dissent, and absurd conceits. In some fields, 
243 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
highly productive fields, such behaviour is almost the norm. 
I think all that social turmoil and human weakness aids the 
enterprise of science. There is an established framework in which 
any scientist can prove another wrong and make sure everyone 
else knows about it. Even when our motives are base, we keep 
stumbling on something new. 
The American chemistry Nobel laureate Harold C. Urey once 
confided to me that as he got older (he was then in his seventies), 
he experienced increasingly concerted efforts to prove him wrong. 
He described it as 'the fastest gun in the West' syndrome: the 
young man who could outdraw the celebrated old gunslinger 
would inherit his reputation and the respect paid to him. It was 
annoying, he grumbled, but it did help direct the young whipper-
snappers into important areas of research that they would never 
have entered on their own. 
Being human, scientists also sometimes engage in observational 
selection: they like to remember those cases when they've been 
right and forget when they've been wrong. But in many instances, 
what is 'wrong' is partly right, or stimulates others to find out 
what's right. One of the most productive astrophysicists of our 
time has been Fred Hoyle, responsible for monumental contribu-
tions to our understanding of the evolution of stars, the synthesis 
of the chemical elements, cosmology and much else. Sometimes 
he's succeeded by being right before anyone else even understood 
that there was something that needed explaining. Sometimes he's 
succeeded by being wrong - by being so provocative, by suggest-
ing such outrageous alternatives that the observers and experi-
mentalists feel obliged to check it out. The impassioned and 
concerted effort to 'prove Fred wrong' has sometimes failed and 
sometimes succeeded. In almost every case, it has pushed forward 
the frontiers of knowledge. Even Hoyle at his most outrageous -
for example, proposing that the influenza and HIV viruses are 
dropped down on Earth from comets, and that interstellar dust 
grains are bacteria - has led to significant advances in knowledge 
(although turning up nothing to support those particular notions.) 
It might be useful for scientists now and again to list some of their 
mistakes. It might play an instructive role in illuminating and 
244 


Antiscience 
demythologizing the process of science and in enlightening 
younger scientists. Even Johannes Kepler, Isaac Newton, Charles 
Darwin, Gregor Mendel and Albert Einstein made serious mis-
takes. But the scientific enterprise arranges things so that team-
work prevails: what one of us, even the most brilliant among us, 
misses, another of us, even someone much less celebrated and 
capable, may detect and rectify. 
For myself, I've tended in past books to recount some of the 
occasions when I've been right. Let me here mention a few of the 
cases where I've been wrong: at a time when no spacecraft had 
been to Venus, I thought at first that the atmospheric pressure was 
several times that on Earth, rather than many tens of times. I 
thought the clouds of Venus were made mainly of water, when 
they turn out to be only 25 per cent water. I thought there might 
be plate tectonics on Mars, when close-up spacecraft observations 
now show hardly a hint of plate tectonics. I thought the highish 
infrared temperatures of Titan might be due to a sizeable green-
house effect there; instead, it turns out, it is caused by a 
stratospheric temperature inversion. Just before Iraq torched the 
Kuwaiti oil wells in January 1991, I warned that so much smoke 
might get so high as to disrupt agriculture in much of South Asia; 
as events transpired, it was pitch black at noon and the tempera-
tures dropped 4-6°C over the Persian Gulf, but not much smoke 
reached stratospheric altitudes and Asia was spared. I did not 
sufficiently stress the uncertainty of the calculations. 
Different scientists have different speculative styles, some being 
much more cautious than others. As long as new ideas are testable 
and scientists are not overly dogmatic, no harm is done; indeed, 
considerable progress can be made. In the first four instances I've 
just mentioned where I was wrong, I was trying to understand a 
distant world from a few clues in the absence of thorough 
spacecraft investigations. In the natural course of planetary explo-
ration more data come in, and we find an army of old ideas 
ploughed down by an armamentarium of new facts. 
Postmodernists have criticized Kepler's astronomy because it 
emerged out of his medieval, monotheistic religious views; Darwin's 
evolutionary biology for being motivated by a wish to perpetuate the 
245 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
privileged social class from which he came, or to justify his supposed 
prior atheism; and so on. Some of these claims are just. Some are 
not. But why does it matter what biases and emotional predisposi-
tions scientists bring to their studies, so long as they are scrupulously 
honest and other people with different proclivities check their 
results? Presumably no one would argue that the conservative view 
on the sum of fourteen and twenty-seven differs from the liberal 
view, or that the mathematical function that is its own derivative is 
the exponential in the northern hemisphere but some other function 
in the southern. Any regular periodic function can be represented to 
arbitrary accuracy by a Fourier series in Muslim as well as in Hindu 
mathematics. Non-commutative algebras (where A times B does not 
equal B times A) are as self-consistent and meaningful for speakers 
of Indo-European languages as for speakers of Finno-Ugric. Math-
ematics might be prized or ignored, but it is equally true everywhere 
- independent of ethnicity, culture, language, religion, ideology. 
Towards the opposite extreme, there are questions such as 
whether abstract expressionism can be 'great' art, or rap 'great' 
music; whether it's more important to curb inflation or unemploy-
ment; whether French culture is superior to German culture; or 
whether prohibitions against murder should apply to the nation 
state. Here the questions are oversimple, or the dichotomies false, 
or the answers dependent on unspoken assumptions. Here local 
biases might very well determine the answers. 
Where in this subjective continuum, from almost fully inde-
pendent of cultural norms to almost wholly dependent on them, 
does science lie? Although issues of bias and cultural chauvinism 
certainly arise, and although its content is continually being 
refined, science is clearly much closer to mathematics than it is to 
fashion. The claim that its findings are in general arbitrary and 
biased is not merely tendentious, but specious. 
The historians Joyce Appleby, Lynn Hunt and Margaret Jacob 
(in Telling the Truth About History, 1994) criticize Isaac Newton: 
he is said to have rejected the philosophical position of Descartes 
because it might challenge conventional religion and lead to social 
chaos and atheism. Such criticisms amount only to the charge that 
scientists are human. How Newton was buffeted by the intellec-
tual currents of his time is of course of interest to the historian of 
246 


Antiscience 
ideas; but it has little bearing on the truth of his propositions. For 
them to be generally accepted, they must convince atheists and 
theists alike. This is just what happened. 
Appleby and her colleagues claim that 'When Darwin formu-
lated his theory of evolution, he was an atheist and a materialist,' 
and suggest that evolution was a product of a purported atheist 
agenda. They have hopelessly confused cause and effect. Darwin 
was about to become a minister of the Church of England when 
the opportunity to sail on HMS Beagle presented itself. His 
religious ideas, as he himself described them, were at the time 
highly conventional. He found every one of the Anglican Articles 
of Faith entirely believable. Through his interrogation of Nature, 
through science, it slowly dawned on him that at least some of his 
religion was false. That's why he changed his religious views. 
Appleby and her colleagues are appalled at Darwin's descrip-
tion of 'the low morality of savages . . . their insufficient powers 
of reasoning . . . [their] weak power of self-command', and state 
that 'now many people are shocked by his racism'. But there was 
no racism at all, as far as I can tell, in Darwin's comment. He was 
alluding to the inhabitants of Tierra del Fuego, suffering from 
grinding scarcity in the most barren and Antarctic province of 
Argentina. When he described a South American woman of 
African origin who threw herself to her death rather than submit 
to slavery, he noted that it was only prejudice that kept us from 
seeing her defiance in the same heroic light as we would a similar 
act by the proud matron of a noble Roman family. He was himself 
almost thrown off the Beagle by Captain FitzRoy for his militant 
opposition to the Captain's racism. Darwin was head and shoul-
ders above most of his contemporaries in this regard. 
But again, even if he was not, how does it affect the truth or 
falsity of natural selection? Thomas Jefferson and George 
Washington owned slaves; Albert Einstein and Mohandas 
Gandhi were imperfect husbands and fathers. The list goes on 
indefinitely. We are all flawed and creatures of our times. Is it 
fair to judge us by the unknown standards of the future? Some 
of the habits of our age will doubtless be considered barbaric by 
later generations - perhaps for insisting that small children and 
even infants sleep alone instead of with their parents; or 
247 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
exciting nationalist passions as a means of gaining popular 
approval and achieving high political office; or allowing bribery 
and corruption as a way of life; or keeping pets; or eating 
animals and jailing chimpanzees; or criminalizing the use of 
euphoriants by adults; or allowing our children to grow up 
ignorant. 
Occasionally, in retrospect, someone stands out. In my book, 
the English-born American revolutionary Thomas Paine is one 
such. He was far ahead of his time. He courageously opposed 
monarchy, aristocracy, racism, slavery, superstition and sexism 
when all of these constituted the conventional wisdom. He was 
unswerving in his criticism of conventional religion. He wrote in 
The Age of Reason: 'Whenever we read the obscene stories, the 
voluptuous debaucheries, the cruel and torturous executions, the 
unrelenting vindictiveness with which more than half the Bible is 
filled, it would be more consistent that we called it the word of a 
demon than the word of God. It . . . has served to corrupt and 
brutalize mankind.' At the same time the book exhibited the 
deepest reverence for a Creator of the Universe whose existence 
Paine argued was apparent at a glance at the natural world. But 
condemning much of the Bible while embracing God seemed an 
impossible position to most of his contemporaries. Christian 
theologians concluded he was drunk, mad or corrupt. The Jewish 
scholar David Levi forbade his co-religionists from even touching, 
much less reading, the book. Paine was made to suffer so much for 
his views (including being thrown into prison after the French 
Revolution for being too consistent in his opposition to tyranny) 
that he became an embittered old man.* 
Yes, the Darwinian insight can be turned upside down and 
grotesquely misused: voracious robber barons may explain their 
* Paine was the author of the revolutionary pamphlet 'Common Sense'. Pub-
lished on 10 January 1776, it sold over half a million copies in the next few 
months and stirred many Americans to the cause of independence. He was the 
author of the three best-selling books of the eighteenth century. Later 
generations reviled him for his social and religious views. Theodore Roosevelt 
called him a 'filthy little atheist' - despite his profound belief in God. He is 
probably the most illustrious American revolutionary uncommemorated by a 
monument in Washington, DC. 


Antiscience 
cut-throat practices by an appeal to Social Darwinism; Nazis and 
other racists may call on 'survival of the fittest' to justify genocide. 
But Darwin did not make John D. Rockefeller or Adolf Hitler. 
Greed, the Industrial Revolution, the free enterprise system, and 
corruption of government by the monied are adequate to explain 
nineteenth-century capitalism. Ethnocentrism, xenophobia, social 
hierarchies, the long history of anti-Semitism in Germany, the 
Versailles Treaty, German child-rearing practices, inflation and 
the Depression seem adequate to explain Hitler's rise to power. 
Very like these or similar events would have transpired with or 
without Darwin. And modern Darwinism makes it abundantly 
clear that many less ruthless traits, some not always admired by 
robber barons and Fuhrers - altruism, general intelligence, com-
passion - may be the key to survival. 
If we could censor Darwin, what other kinds of knowledge 
could also be censored? Who would do the censoring? Who 
among us is wise enough to know which information and insights 
we can safely dispense with, and which will be necessary ten or a 
hundred or a thousand years into the future? Surely we can exert 
some discretion on which kinds of machines and products it is 
safe to develop. We must in any case make such decisions, 
because we do not have the resources to pursue all possible 
technologies. But censoring knowledge, telling people what they 
must think, is the aperture to thought police, authoritarian 
government, foolish and incompetent decision-making and long-
term decline. 
Fervid ideologues and authoritarian regimes find it easy and 
natural to impose their views and suppress the alternatives. Nazi 
scientists, such as the Nobel laureate physicist Johannes Stark, 
distinguished fanciful, imaginary 'Jewish science', including rela-
tivity and quantum mechanics, from realistic, practical 'Aryan 
science'. Another example: 'A new era of the magical explanation 
of the world is rising,' said Adolf Hitler, 'an explanation based on 
will rather than knowledge. There is no truth, in either the moral 
or the scientific sense.' 
As he described it to me three decades later, in 1922 the 
American geneticist Hermann J. Muller flew from Berlin to 
249 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
Moscow in a light plane to witness the new Soviet society 
firsthand. He must have liked what he saw, because - after his 
discovery that radiation makes mutations (a discovery that would 
later win him a Nobel Prize) - he moved to Moscow to help 
establish modern genetics in the Soviet Union. But by the middle 
1930s a charlatan named Trofim Lysenko had caught the notice 
and then the enthusiastic support of Stalin. Lysenko argued that 
genetics - which he called 'Mendelism-Weissmanism-Morganism', 
after some of the founders of the field - had an unacceptable 
philosophical base, and that philosophically 'correct' genetics, 
genetics that paid proper obeisance to communist dialectical 
materialism, would yield very different results. In particular, 
Lysenko's genetics would permit an additional crop of winter 
wheat - welcome news to a Soviet economy reeling from Stalin's 
forced collectivization of agriculture. 
Lysenko's purported evidence was suspect, there were no 
experimental controls, and his broad conclusions flew in the face 
of an immense body of contradictory data. As Lysenko's power 
grew, Muller passionately argued that classical Mendelian genet-
ics was in full harmony with dialectical materialism, while 
Lysenko, who believed in the inheritance of acquired characteris-
tics and denied a material basis of heredity, was an 'idealist', or 
worse. Muller was strongly supported by N.I. Vavilov, erstwhile 
president of the Ail-Union Academy of Agricultural Sciences. 
In a 1936 address to the Academy of Agricultural Sciences, now 
presided over by Lysenko, Muller gave a stirring address that 
included these words: 
If the outstanding practitioners are going to support theories 
and opinions that are obviously absurd to everyone who 
knows even a little about genetics - such views as those 
recently put forward by President Lysenko and those who 
think as he does - then the choice before us will resemble the 
choice between witchcraft and medicine, between astrology 
and astronomy, between alchemy and chemistry. 
In a country of arbitrary arrests and police terror, this speech 
displayed exemplary - many thought foolhardy - integrity and 
250 


Antiscience 
courage. In The Vavilov Affair (1984), the Soviet emigre historian 
Mark Popovsky describes these words as being accompanied by 
'thunderous applause from the whole hall' and 'remembered by 
everyone still living who took part in the session'. 
Three months later, Muller was visited in Moscow by a Western 
geneticist who expressed astonishment at a widely circulated 
letter, signed by Muller, that condemned the prevalence of 
'Mendelism-Weissmanism-Morganism' in the West and that urged 
a boycott of the forthcoming International Congress of Genetics. 
Having never seen, much less signed, such a letter, an outraged 
Muller concluded that it was a forgery perpetrated by Lysenko. 
Muller promptly wrote an angry denunciation of Lysenko to 
Pravda and mailed a copy to Stalin. 
The next day Vavilov came to Muller in a state of some 
agitation, informing him that he, Muller, had just volunteered to 
serve in the Spanish Civil War. The letter to Pravda had put 
Muller's life in danger. He left Moscow the next day, just evading, 
so he was later told, the NKVD, the secret police. Vavilov was not 
so lucky, and perished in 1943 in Siberia. 
With the continuing support of Stalin and later of Khrushchev, 
Lysenko ruthlessly suppressed classical genetics. Soviet school 
biology texts in the early 1960s had as little about chromosomes 
and classical genetics as many American school biology texts have 
about evolution today. But no new crop of winter wheat grew; 
incantations of the phrase 'dialectical materialism' went unheard 
by the DNA of domesticated plants; Soviet agriculture remained 
in the doldrums; and today, partly for this reason, Russia -
world-class in many other sciences - is still almost hopelessly 
backward in molecular biology and genetic engineering. Two 
generations of modern biologists have been lost. Lysenkoism was 
not overthrown until 1964, in a series of debates and votes at the 
Soviet Academy of Sciences - one of the few institutions to 
maintain a degree of independence from the leaders of party and 
state - in which the nuclear physicist Andrei Sakharov played an 
outstanding role. 
Americans tend to shake their heads in astonishment at the 
Soviet experience. The idea that some state-endorsed ideology 
or popular prejudice would hogtie scientific progress seems 
251 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
unthinkable. For two hundred years Americans have prided 
themselves on being a practical, pragmatic, nonideological 
people. And yet anthropological and psychological pseudo-
science has flourished in the United States - on race, for 
example. Under the guise of 'creationism', a serious effort 
continues to be made to prevent evolutionary theory - the most 
powerful integrating idea in all of biology, and essential for 
other sciences ranging from astronomy to anthropology - from 
being taught in the schools. 
Science is different from many another human enterprise - not, of 
course, in its practitioners' being influenced by the culture they 
grew up in, nor in sometimes being right and sometimes wrong 
(which are common to every human activity), but in its passion for 
framing testable hypotheses, in its search for definitive experi-
ments that confirm or deny ideas, in the vigour of its substantive 
debate, and in its willingness to abandon ideas that have been 
found wanting. If we were not aware of our own limitations, 
though, if we were not seeking further data, if we were unwilling 
to perform controlled experiments, if we did not respect the 
evidence, we would have very little leverage in our quest for the 
truth. Through opportunism and timidity we might then be 
buffeted by every ideological breeze, with nothing of lasting value 
to hang on to. 
252 


15 
Newton's Sleep 
May God keep us from single vision and Newton's sleep. 
William Blake, 
from a poem included in a letter 
to Thomas Butts (1802) 
[I]gnorance more frequently begets confidence than does 
knowledge: it is those who know little, and not those who 
know much, who so positively assert that this or that 
problem will never be solved by science. 
Charles Darwin, Introduction, 
The Descent of Man (1871) 
B
y 'Newton's sleep', the poet, painter and revolutionary 
William Blake seems to have meant a tunnel vision in the 
perspective of Newton's physics, as well as Newton's own (incom-
plete) disengagement from mysticism. Blake thought the idea of 
atoms and particles of light amusing, and Newton's influence on 
our species 'satanic'. A common critique of science is that it is too 
narrow. Because of our well-demonstrated fallibilities, it rules out 
of court, beyond serious discourse, a wide range of uplifting 
images, playful notions, earnest mysticism and stupefying won-
ders. Without physical evidence, science does not admit spirits, 
souls, angels, devils or dharma bodies of the Buddha. Or alien 
visitors. 
253 
