THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
In the jury selection process, the court needs to be reassured 
that the verdict will be based on evidence. It makes heroic efforts 
to weed out bias. It is aware of human imperfection. Does the 
potential juror personally know the district attorney, or the 
prosecutor, or the defence attorney? What about the judge or the 
other jurors? Has she formed an opinion about this case not from 
the facts laid out in court but from pre-trial publicity? Will she 
assign evidence from police officers greater or lesser weight than 
evidence from witnesses for the defence? Is she biased against the 
defendant's ethnic group? Does the potential juror live in the 
neighbourhood where the crimes were committed, and might that 
influence her judgement? Does she have a scientific background 
about matters on which expert witnesses will testify? (This is often 
a count against her.) Are any of her relatives or close family 
members employed in law enforcement or criminal law? Has she 
herself ever had any run-ins with police that might influence her 
judgement in the trial? Was any close friend or relative ever 
arrested on a similar charge? 
The American system of jurisprudence recognizes a wide range 
of factors, predispositions, prejudices and experiences that might 
cloud our judgement, or affect our objectivity, sometimes even 
without our knowing it. It goes to great, perhaps even extrava-
gant, lengths to safeguard the process of judgement in a criminal 
trial from the human weaknesses of those who must decide on 
innocence or guilt. Even then, of course, the process sometimes 
fails. 
Why would we settle for anything less when interrogating the 
natural world, or when attempting to decide on vital matters of 
politics, economics, religion and ethics? 
If it is to be applied consistently, science imposes, in exchange for 
its manifold gifts, a certain onerous burden: we are enjoined, no 
matter how uncomfortable it might be, to consider ourselves and 
our cultural institutions scientifically and not to accept uncritically 
whatever we're told; to surmount as best we can our hopes, 
conceits and unexamined beliefs; to view ourselves as we really 
are. Can we conscientiously and courageously follow planetary 
motion or bacterial genetics wherever the search may lead, but 
278 


The Marriage of Scepticism and Wonder 
declare the origin of matter or human behaviour off-limits? 
Because its explanatory power is so great, once you get the hang 
of scientific reasoning you're eager to apply it everywhere. 
However, in the course of looking deeply within ourselves, we 
may challenge notions that give comfort before the terrors of the 
world. I'm aware that some of the discussion in, say, the preceding 
chapter may have such a character. 
When anthropologists survey the thousands of distinct cul-
tures and ethnicities that comprise the human family, they are 
struck by how few features there are that are givens, always 
present no matter how exotic the society. There are, for 
example, cultures - the Ik of Uganda is one - where all Ten 
Commandments seem to be systematically, institutionally 
ignored. There are societies that abandon their old and their 
newborn, that eat their enemies, that use seashells or pigs or 
young women for money. But they all have a strong incest 
taboo, they all use technology, and almost all believe in a 
supernatural world of gods and spirits, often connected with the 
natural environment they inhabit and the well-being of the 
plants and animals they eat. (The ones with a supreme god who 
lives in the sky tend to be the most ferocious - torturing their 
enemies for example. But this is a statistical correlation only; 
the causal link has not been established, although speculations 
naturally present themselves.) 
In every such society, there is a cherished world of myth and 
metaphor which co-exists with the workaday world. Efforts to 
reconcile the two are made, and any rough edges at the joints tend 
to be off-limits and ignored. We compartmentalize. Some scien-
tists do this too, effortlessly stepping between the sceptical world 
of science and the credulous world of religious belief without 
skipping a beat. Of course, the greater the mismatch between 
these two worlds, the more difficult it is to be comfortable, with 
untroubled conscience, with both. 
In a life short and uncertain, it seems heartless to do anything 
that might deprive people of the consolation of faith when science 
cannot remedy their anguish. Those who cannot bear the burden 
of science are free to ignore its precepts. But we cannot have 
science in bits and pieces, applying it where we feel safe and 
279 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
ignoring it where we feel threatened - again, because we are not 
wise enough to do so. 
Except by sealing the brain off into separate air-tight compart-
ments, how is it possible to fly in airplanes, listen to the radio or 
take antibiotics while holding that the Earth is around 10,000 
years old or that all Sagittarians are gregarious and affable? 
Have I ever heard a sceptic wax superior and contemptuous? 
Certainly. I've even sometimes heard, to my retrospective dismay, 
that unpleasant tone in my own voice. There are human imperfec-
tions on both sides of this issue. Even when it's applied sensitively, 
scientific scepticism may come across as arrogant, dogmatic, 
heartless and dismissive of the feelings and deeply held beliefs of 
others. And, it must be said, some scientists and dedicated 
sceptics apply this tool as a blunt instrument, with little finesse. 
Sometimes it looks as if the sceptical conclusion came first, that 
contentions were dismissed before, not after, the evidence was 
examined. All of us cherish our beliefs. They are, to a degree, 
self-defining. When someone comes along who challenges our 
belief system as insufficiently well based - or who, like Socrates, 
merely asks embarrassing questions that we haven't thought of, or 
demonstrates that we've swept key underlying assumptions under 
the rug - it becomes much more than a search for knowledge. It 
feels like a personal assault. 
The scientist who first proposed to consecrate doubt as a prime 
virtue of the inquiring mind made it clear that it was a tool and not 
an end in itself. Rene Descartes wrote, 
I did not imitate the sceptics who doubt only for doubting's 
sake, and pretend to be always undecided; on the contrary, 
my whole intention was to arrive at a certainty, and to dig 
away the drift and the sand until I reached the rock or the clay 
beneath. 
In the way that scepticism is sometimes applied to issues of public 
concern, there is a tendency to belittle, to condescend, to ignore 
the fact that, deluded or not, supporters of superstition and 
pseudoscience are human beings with real feelings, who, like the 
sceptics, are trying to figure out how the world works and what 
280 


The Marriage of Scepticism and Wonder 
our role in it might be. Their motives are in many cases consonant 
with science. If their culture has not given them all the tools they 
need to pursue this great quest, let us temper our criticism with 
kindness. None of us comes fully equipped. 
Clearly there are limits to the uses of scepticism. There is some 
cost-benefit analysis which must be applied, and if the comfort, 
consolation and hope delivered by mysticism and superstition is 
high, and the dangers of belief comparatively low, should we not 
keep our misgivings to ourselves? But the issue is tricky. Imagine 
that you enter a big-city taxicab and the moment you get settled in 
the driver begins a harangue about the supposed iniquities and 
inferiorities of another ethnic group. Is your best course to keep 
quiet, bearing in mind that silence conveys assent? Or is it your 
moral responsibility to argue with him, to express outrage, even to 
leave the cab - because you know that every silent assent will 
encourage him next time, and every vigorous dissent will cause 
him next time to think twice? Likewise, if we offer too much silent 
assent about mysticism and superstition - even when it seems to 
be doing a little good - we abet a general climate in which 
scepticism is considered impolite, science tiresome, and rigorous 
thinking somehow stuffy and inappropriate. Figuring out a pru-
dent balance takes wisdom. 
The Committee for the Scientific Investigation of Claims of the 
Paranormal is an organization of scientists, academics, magicians 
and others dedicated to sceptical scrutiny of emerging or full-
blown pseudosciences. It was founded by the University of 
Buffalo philosopher Paul Kurtz in 1976. I've been affiliated with it 
since its beginning. Its acronym, CSICOP, is pronounced 'sci-cop' 
- as if it's an organization of scientists performing a police 
function. Those wounded by CSICOP's analyses sometimes make 
just such a complaint: it's hostile to every new idea, they say, will 
go to absurd lengths in its knee-jerk debunking, is a vigilante 
organization, a New Inquisition, and so on. 
CSICOP is imperfect. In certain cases such a critique is to some 
degree justified. But from my point of view CSICOP serves an 
important social function as a well-known organization to which 
media can apply when they wish to hear the other side of the 
281 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
story, especially when some amazing claim to pseudoscience is 
adjudged newsworthy. It used to be (and for much of the global 
news media it still is) that every levitating guru, visiting alien, 
channeller and faith-healer, when covered by the media, would be 
treated nonsubstantively and uncritically. There would be no 
institutional memory at the television studio or newspaper or 
magazine about other, similar claims previously shown to be 
scams and bamboozles. CSICOP represents a counterbalance, 
although not yet nearly a loud enough voice, to the pseudoscience 
gullibility that seems second nature to so much of the media. 
One of my favourite cartoons shows a fortune-teller scrutinizing 
the mark's palm and gravely concluding, 'You are very gullible.' 
CSICOP publishes a bi-monthly periodical called The Skeptical 
Inquirer. On the day it arrives, I take it home from the office and 
pore through its pages, wondering what new misunderstandings 
will be revealed. There's always another bamboozle that I never 
thought of. Crop circles! Aliens have come and made perfect 
circles and mathematical messages . . . in wheat! Who would have 
thought it? So unlikely an artistic medium. Or they've come and 
eviscerated cows - on a large scale, systematically. Farmers are 
furious. At first, I'm impressed by the inventiveness of the stories. 
But then, on more sober reflection, it always strikes me how dull 
and routine these accounts are; what a compilation of unimagina-
tive stale ideas, chauvinisms, hopes and fears dressed up as facts. 
The contentions, from this point of view, are suspect on their face. 
That's all they can conceive the extraterrestrials doing . . . mak-
ing circles in wheat? What a failure of the imagination! With every 
issue, another facet of pseudoscience is revealed and criticized. 
And yet, the chief deficiency I see in the sceptical movement is in 
its polarization: Us v. Them - the sense that we have a monopoly on 
the truth; that those other people who believe in all these stupid 
doctrines are morons; that if you're sensible, you'll listen to us; and if 
not, you're beyond redemption. This is unconstructive. It does not 
get the message across. It condemns the sceptics to permanent 
minority status; whereas, a compassionate approach that from the 
beginning acknowledges the human roots of pseudoscience and 
superstition might be much more widely accepted. 
If we understand this, then of course we feel the uncertainty and 
282 


The Marriage of Scepticism and Wonder 
pain of the abductees, or those who dare not leave home without 
consulting their horoscopes, or those who pin their hopes on 
crystals from Atlantis. And such compassion for kindred spirits in 
a common quest also works to make science and the scientific 
method less off-putting, especially to the young. 
Many pseudoscientific and New Age belief systems emerge out 
of dissatisfaction with conventional values and perspectives and 
are therefore themselves a kind of scepticism. (The same is true of 
the origins of most religions.) David Hess (in Science and the New 
Age) argues that 
the world of paranormal beliefs and practices cannot be 
reduced to cranks, crackpots, and charlatans. A large number 
of sincere people are exploring alternative approaches to 
questions of personal meaning, spirituality, healing, and 
paranormal experience in general. To the sceptic, their quest 
may ultimately rest on a delusion, but debunking is hardly 
likely to be an effective rhetorical device for their rationalist 
project of getting [people] to recognize what appears to the 
sceptic as mistaken or magical thinking. 
. . . [T]he sceptic might take a clue from cultural anthro-
pology and develop a more sophisticated scepticism by under-
standing alternative belief systems from the perspective of the 
people who hold them and by situating these beliefs in their 
historical, social, and cultural contexts. As a result, the world 
of the paranormal may appear less as a silly turn toward 
irrationalism and more as an idiom through which segments 
of society express their conflicts, dilemmas, and identi-
ties . . . 
To the extent that sceptics have a psychological or socio-
logical theory of New Age beliefs, it tends to be very 
simplistic: paranormal beliefs are 'comforting' to people who 
cannot handle the reality of an atheistic universe, or their 
beliefs are the product of an irresponsible media that is not 
encouraging the public to think critically . . . 
But Hess's just criticism promptly deteriorates into complaints 
that parapsychologists 'have had their careers ruined by sceptical 
283 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
colleagues', and that sceptics exhibit 'a kind of religious zeal to 
defend the materialistic and atheistic world view that smacks of 
what has been called "scientific fundamentalism" or "irrational 
rationalism" '. 
This is a common but to me deeply mysterious - indeed, occult 
- complaint. Again, we know a great deal about the existence and 
properties of matter. If a given phenomenon can already be 
plausibly understood in terms of matter and energy, why should 
we hypothesize that something else, something for which there is 
as yet no other good evidence, is responsible? Yet the complaint 
persists: sceptics won't accept that there's an invisible fire-
breathing dragon in my garage because they're all atheistic 
materialists. 
In Science in the New Age, scepticism is discussed, but it is not 
understood, and it is certainly not practised. All sorts of paranor-
mal claims are quoted, sceptics are 'deconstructed', but you can 
never learn from reading it that there are ways to decide whether 
New Age and parapsychological claims to knowledge are promis-
ing or false. It's all, as in many postmodernist texts, a matter of 
how strongly people feel and what their biases may be. 
Robert Anton Wilson (in The New Inquisition: Irrational 
Rationalism and the Citadel of Science, 1986) describes sceptics as 
the 'New Inquisition'. But to my knowledge no sceptic compels 
belief. Indeed, on most TV documentaries and talk shows, 
sceptics get short shrift and almost no air time. All that's 
happening is that some doctrines and methods are being criticized 
- at the worst, ridiculed - in magazines like The Skeptical Inquirer 
with circulations of a few tens of thousands. New Agers are not 
much, as in earlier times, being called up before criminal tribu-
nals, nor whipped for having visions, and they are certainly not 
being burned at the stake. Why fear a little criticism? Aren't they 
interested to see how well their beliefs hold up against the best 
counterarguments the sceptics can muster? 
Perhaps one per cent of the time, someone who has an idea that 
smells, feels and looks indistinguishable from the usual run of 
pseudoscience will turn out to be right. Maybe some undiscovered 
reptile left over from the Cretaceous period will indeed be found 
284 


The Marriage of Scepticism and Wonder 
in Loch Ness or the Congo Republic; or we will find artefacts of an 
advanced, non-human species elsewhere in the solar system. At 
the time of writing there are three claims in the ESP field which, in 
my opinion, deserve serious study: (1) that by thought alone 
humans can (barely) affect random number generators in comput-
ers; (2) that people under mild sensory deprivation can receive 
thoughts or images 'projected' at them; and (3) that young 
children sometimes report the details of a previous life, which 
upon checking turn out to be accurate and which they could not 
have known about in any other way than reincarnation. I pick 
these claims not because I think they're likely to be valid (I don't), 
but as examples of contentions that might be true. The last three 
have at least some, although still dubious, experimental support. 
Of course, I could be wrong. 
In the middle 1970s an astronomer I admire put together a 
modest manifesto called 'Objections to Astrology' and asked me 
to endorse it. I struggled with his wording, and in the end found 
myself unable to sign, not because I thought astrology has any 
validity whatever, but because I felt (and still feel) that the tone of 
the statement was authoritarian. It criticized astrology for having 
origins shrouded in superstition. But this is true as well for 
religion, chemistry, medicine and astronomy, to mention only 
four. The issue is not what faltering and rudimentary knowledge 
astrology came from, but what is its present validity. Then there 
was speculation on the psychological motivations of those who 
believe in astrology. These motivations - for example, the feeling 
of powerlessness in a complex, troublesome and unpredictable 
world - might explain why astrology is not generally given the 
sceptical scrutiny it deserves, but is quite peripheral to whether it 
works. 
The statement stressed that we can think of no mechanism by 
which astrology could work. This is certainly a relevant point but 
by itself it's unconvincing. No mechanism was known for conti-
nental drift (now subsumed in plate tectonics) when it was 
proposed by Alfred Wegener in the first quarter of the twentieth 
century to explain a range of puzzling data in geology and 
palaeontology. (Ore-bearing veins of rocks and fossils seemed to 
run continuously from eastern South America to West Africa; 
285 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
were the two continents once touching and the Atlantic Ocean 
new to our planet?) The notion was roundly dismissed by all the 
great geophysicists, who were certain that continents were fixed, 
not floating on anything, and therefore unable to 'drift'. Instead, 
the key twentieth-century idea in geophysics turns out to be plate 
tectonics; we now understand that continental plates do indeed 
float and 'drift' (or better, are carried by a kind of conveyor belt 
driven by the great heat engine of the Earth's interior), and all 
those great geophysicists were simply wrong. Objections to pseu-
doscience on the grounds of unavailable mechanism can be 
mistaken - although if the contentions violate well-established 
laws of physics, such objections of course carry great weight. 
Many valid criticisms of astrology can be formulated in a few 
sentences: for example, its acceptance of precession of the equi-
noxes in announcing an 'Age of Aquarius' and its rejection of 
precession of the equinoxes in casting horoscopes; its neglect of 
atmospheric refraction; its list of supposedly significant celestial 
objects that is mainly limited to naked eye objects known to 
Ptolemy in the second century, and that ignores an enormous 
variety of new astronomical objects discovered since (where is the 
astrology of near-Earth asteroids?); inconsistent requirements for 
detailed information on the time as compared to the latitude and 
longitude of birth; the failure of astrology to pass the identical-
twin test; the major differences in horoscopes cast from the same 
birth information by different astrologers; and the absence of 
demonstrated correlation between horoscopes and such psycho-
logical tests as the Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inventory. 
What I would have signed is a statement describing and refuting 
the principal tenets of astrological belief. Such a statement would 
have been far more persuasive than what was actually circulated 
and published. But astrology, which has been with us for four 
thousand years or more, today seems more popular than ever. At 
least a quarter of all Americans, according to opinion polls, 
'believe' in astrology. A third think Sun-sign astrology is 'scien-
tific'. The fraction of schoolchildren believing in astrology rose 
from 40 per cent to 59 per cent between 1978 and 1984. There are 
perhaps ten times more astrologers than astronomers in the 
United States. In France there are more astrologers than Roman 
286 


The Marriage of Scepticism and Wonder 
Catholic clergy. No stuffy dismissal by a gaggle of scientists makes 
contact with the social needs that astrology - no matter how 
invalid it is - addresses, and science does not. 
As I've tried to stress, at the heart of science is an essential 
balance between two seemingly contradictory attitudes - an 
openness to new ideas, no matter how bizarre or counterintuitive, 
and the most ruthlessly sceptical scrutiny of all ideas, old and new. 
This is how deep truths are winnowed from deep nonsense. The 
collective enterprise of creative thinking and sceptical thinking, 
working together, keeps the field on track. Those two seemingly 
contradictory attitudes are, though, in some tension. 
Consider this claim: as I walk along, time - as measured by my 
wristwatch or my ageing process - slows down. Also, I shrink in 
the direction of motion. Also, I get more massive. Who has ever 
witnessed such a thing? It's easy to dismiss it out of hand. Here's 
another: matter and antimatter are all the time, throughout the 
universe, being created from nothing. Here's a third: once in a 
very great while, your car will spontaneously ooze through the 
brick wall of your garage and be found the next morning on the 
street. They're all absurd! But the first is a statement of special 
relativity, and the other two are consequences of quantum 
mechanics (vacuum fluctuations and barrier tunnelling,* they're 
called). Like it or not, that's the way the world is. If you insist it's 
ridiculous, you'll be forever closed to some of the major findings 
on the rules that govern the Universe. 
If you're only sceptical, then no new ideas make it through to 
you. You never learn anything. You become a crochety misan-
thrope convinced that nonsense is ruling the world. (There is, of 
course, much data to support you.) Since major discoveries in the 
borderlines of science are rare, experience will tend to confirm 
your grumpiness. But every now and then a new idea turns out to 
be on the mark, valid and wonderful. If you're too resolutely and 
uncompromisingly sceptical, you're going to miss (or resent) the 
* The average waiting time per stochastic ooze is much longer than the age of the 
Universe since the Big Bang. But, however improbable, in principle it might 
happen tomorrow. 
287 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
transforming discoveries in science, and either way you will be 
obstructing understanding and progress. Mere scepticism is not 
enough. 
At the same time, science requires the most vigorous and 
uncompromising scepticism, because the vast majority of ideas are 
simply wrong, and the only way to winnow the wheat from the 
chaff is by critical experiment and analysis. If you're open to the 
point of gullibility and have not a microgram of sceptical sense in 
you, then you cannot distinguish the promising ideas from the 
worthless ones. Uncritically accepting every proffered notion, 
idea and hypothesis is tantamount to knowing nothing. Ideas 
contradict one another; only through sceptical scrutiny can we 
decide among them. Some ideas really are better than others. 
The judicious mix of these two modes of thought is central to 
the success of science. Good scientists do both. On their own, 
talking to themselves, they churn up many new ideas, and criticize 
them systematically. Most of the ideas never make it to the 
outside world. Only those that pass a rigorous self-filtration make 
it out to be criticized by the rest of the scientific community. 
Because of this dogged mutual and self-criticism, and the 
proper reliance on experiment as the arbiter between contending 
hypotheses, many scientists tend to be diffident about describing 
their own sense of wonder at the dawning of a wild surmise. This is 
a pity, because these rare exultant moments demystify and 
humanize the scientific endeavour. 
No one can be entirely open or completely sceptical. We all 
must draw the line somewhere.* An ancient Chinese proverb 
advises, 'Better to be too credulous than too sceptical', but this is 
from an extremely conservative society in which stability was 
much more prized than freedom and where the rulers had a 
powerful vested interest in not being challenged. Most scientists, I 
believe, would say, 'Better to be too sceptical than too credulous'. 
But neither is easy. Responsible, thoroughgoing, rigorous scepti-
cism requires a hardnosed habit of thought that takes practice and 
training to master. Credulity - I think a better word here is 
* And in some cases scepticism would be simply silly, as for example in learning 
to spell. 
288 


The Marriage of Scepticism and Wonder 
'openness' or 'wonder' - does not come easily either. If we really 
are to be open to counterintuitive ideas in physics or social 
organization or anything else, we must grasp those ideas. It means 
nothing to be open to a proposition we don't understand. 
Both scepticism and wonder are skills that need honing and 
practice. Their harmonious marriage within the mind of every 
schoolchild ought to be a principal goal of public education. I'd 
love to see such a domestic felicity portrayed in the media, 
television especially: a community of people really working the 
mix - full of wonder, generously open to every notion, dismissing 
nothing except for good reason, but at the same time, and as 
second nature, demanding stringent standards of evidence; and 
these standards applied with at least as much rigour to what they 
hold dear as to what they are tempted to reject with impunity. 
289 


18 
The Wind Makes Dust 
[T]he wind makes dust because it intends to blow, taking 
away our footprints. 
Specimens of Bushmen Folklore, 
W.H.I. Bleek and L.C. Lloyd, 
collectors, L.C. Lloyd, editor (1911) 
[E]very time a savage tracks his game he employs a 
minuteness of observation, and an accuracy of inductive and 
deductive reasoning which, applied to other matters, would 
assure some reputation as a man of science . . . [T]he 
intellectual labour of a 'good hunter or warrior' considerably 
exceeds that of an ordinary Englishman. 
Thomas H. Huxley, Collected Essays, 
Volume II, Darwiniana: Essays 
(London: Macmillan, 1907), pp. 175-6 
[from 'Mr Darwin's Critics' (1871)] 
W
hy should so many people find science hard to learn and 
hard to teach? I've tried to suggest some of the reasons - its 
precision, its counterintuitive and disquieting aspects, its pros-
pects of misuse, its independence of authority, and so on. But is 
there something deeper? Alan Cromer is a physics professor at 
Northeastern University in Boston who was surprised to find so 
many students unable to grasp the most elementary concepts in his 
290 


The Wind Makes Dust 
physics class. In Uncommon Sense: The Heretical Nature of 
Science (1993), Cromer proposes that science is difficult because 
it's new. We, a species that's a few hundred thousand years old, 
discovered the method of science only a few centuries ago, he 
says. Like writing, which is only a few millennia old, we haven't 
gotten the hang of it yet - or at least not without very serious and 
attentive study. 
Except for an unlikely concatenation of historical events, he 
suggests, we would never have invented science: 
This hostility to science, in the face of its obvious triumphs 
and benefits, is . . . evidence that it is something outside the 
mainstream of human development, perhaps a fluke. 
Chinese civilization invented movable type, gunpowder, the 
rocket, the magnetic compass, the seismograph, and systematic 
observations and chronicles of the heavens. Indian mathemati-
cians invented the zero, the key to comfortable arithmetic and 
therefore to quantitative science. Aztec civilization developed a 
far better calendar than that of the European civilization that 
inundated and destroyed it; they were better able, and for longer 
periods into the future, to predict where the planets would be. But 
none of these civilizations, Cromer argues, had developed the 
sceptical, inquiring, experimental method of science. All of that 
came out of ancient Greece: 
The development of objective thinking by the Greeks 
appears to have required a number of specific cultural 
factors. First was the assembly, where men first learned to 
persuade one another by means of rational debate. Second 
was a maritime economy that prevented isolation and paro-
chialism. Third was the existence of a widespread Greek-
speaking world around which travelers and scholars could 
wander. Fourth was the existence of an independent mer-
chant class that could hire its own teachers. Fifth was the Iliad 
and the Odyssey, literary masterpieces that are themselves 
the epitome of liberal rational thinking. Sixth was a literary 
religion not dominated by priests. And seventh was the 
291 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
persistence of these factors for 1,000 years. 
That all these factors came together in one great civiliza-
tion is quite fortuitous; it didn't happen twice. 
I'm sympathetic to part of this thesis. The ancient Ionians were 
the first we know of to argue systematically that laws and forces of 
Nature, rather than gods, are responsible for the order and even 
the existence of the world. As Lucretius summarized their views, 
'Nature free at once and rid of her haughty lords is seen to do all 
things spontaneously of herself without the meddling of the gods.' 
Except for the first week of introductory philosophy courses, 
though, the names and notions of the early Ionians are almost 
never mentioned in our society. Those who dismiss the gods tend 
to be forgotten. We are not anxious to preserve the memory of 
such sceptics, much less their ideas. Heroes who try to explain the 
world in terms of matter and energy may have arisen many times 
in many cultures, only to be obliterated by the priests and 
philosophers in charge of the conventional wisdom, as the Ionian 
approach was almost wholly lost after the time of Plato and 
Aristotle. With many cultures and many experiments of this sort, 
it may be that only on rare occasions does the idea take root. 
Plants and animals were domesticated and civilization began 
only ten or twelve thousand years ago. The Ionian experiment is 
2,500 years old. It was almost entirely expunged. We can see steps 
towards science in ancient China, India and elsewhere, even 
though faltering, incomplete, and bearing less fruit. But suppose 
the Ionians had never existed, and Greek science and mathemat-
ics never flourished. Is it possible that never again in the history of 
the human species would science have emerged? Or, given many 
cultures and many alternative historical skeins, isn't it likely that 
the right combination of factors would come into play somewhere 
else, sooner or later - in the islands of Indonesia, say, or in the 
Caribbean on the outskirts of a Mesoamerican civilization 
untouched by Conquistadores, or in Norse colonies on the shores 
of the Black Sea? 
The impediment to scientific thinking is not, I think, the 
difficulty of the subject. Complex intellectual feats have been 
mainstays even of oppressed cultures. Shamans, magicians and 
292 


The Wind Makes Dust 
theologians are highly skilled in their intricate and arcane arts. 
No, the impediment is political and hierarchical. In those cultures 
lacking unfamiliar challenges, external or internal, where funda-
mental change is unneeded, novel ideas need not be encouraged. 
Indeed, heresies can be declared dangerous; thinking can be 
rigidified; and sanctions against impermissible ideas can be 
enforced - all without much harm. But under varied and changing 
environmental or biological or political circumstances, simply 
copying the old ways no longer works. Then, a premium awaits 
those who, instead of blandly following tradition, or trying to foist 
their preferences on to the physical or social Universe, are open to 
what the Universe teaches. Each society must decide where in the 
continuum between openness and rigidity safety lies. 
Greek mathematics was a brilliant step forward. Greek science, 
on the other hand - its first steps rudimentary and often unin-
formed by experiment - was riddled with error. Despite the fact 
that we cannot see in pitch darkness, they believed that vision 
depends on a kind of radar that emanates from the eye, bounces 
off what we're seeing, and returns to the eye. (Nevertheless, they 
made substantial progress in optics.) Despite the obvious resem-
blance of children to their mothers, they believed that heredity 
was carried by semen alone, the woman a mere passive receptacle. 
They believed that the horizontal motion of a thrown rock 
somehow lifts it up, so that it takes longer to reach the ground 
than a rock dropped from the same height at the same moment. 
Enamoured of simple geometry, they believed the circle to be 
'perfect'; despite the 'Man in the Moon' and sunspots (occasion-
ally visible to the naked eye at sunset), they held the heavens also 
to be 'perfect'; therefore, planetary orbits had to be circular. 
Being freed from superstition isn't enough for science to 
grow. One must also have the idea of interrogating Nature, of 
doing experiments. There were some brilliant examples -
Eratosthenes's measurement of the Earth's diameter, say, or 
Empedocles's clepsydra experiment demonstrating the material 
nature of air. But in a society in which manual labour is 
demeaned and thought fit only for slaves, as in the classical 
Graeco-Roman world, the experimental method does not 
thrive. Science requires us to be freed of gross superstition and 
293 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
gross injustice both. Often, superstition and injustice are imposed by 
the same ecclesiastical and secular authorities, working hand in 
glove. It is no surprise that political revolutions, scepticism about 
religion, and the rise of science might go together. Liberation from 
superstition is a necessary but not a sufficient condition for science. 
At the same time, it is undeniable that central figures in the 
transition from medieval superstition to modern science were 
profoundly influenced by the idea of one Supreme God who 
created the Universe and established not only commandments 
that humans must live by, but laws that Nature itself must abide 
by. The seventeenth-century German astronomer Johannes 
Kepler, without whom Newtonian physics might not have come to 
be, described his pursuit of science as a wish to know the mind of 
God. In our own time, leading scientists, including Albert Ein-
stein and Stephen Hawking, have described their quest in nearly 
identical terms. The philosopher Alfred North Whitehead and the 
historian of Chinese technology Joseph Needham have also 
suggested that what was lacking in the development of science in 
non-western cultures was monotheism. 
And yet, I think there is strong contrary evidence to this whole 
thesis, calling out to us from across the millennia . . . 
The small hunting party follows the trail of hoofprints and other 
spoor. They pause for a moment by a stand of trees. Squatting on 
their heels, they examine the evidence more carefully. The trail 
they've been following has been crossed by another. Quickly they 
agree on which animals are responsible, how many of them, what 
ages and sexes, whether any are injured, how fast they're travelling, 
how long ago they passed, whether any other hunters are in pursuit, 
whether the party can overtake the game, and if so, how long it will 
take. The decision made, they flick their hands over the trail they 
will follow, make a quiet sound between their teeth like the wind, 
and off they lope. Despite their bows and poison arrows, they 
continue at championship marathon racing form for hours. Almost 
always they've read the message in the ground correctly. The 
wildebeests or elands or okapis are where they thought, in the 
numbers and condition they estimated. The hunt is successful. Meat 
is carried back to the temporary camp. Everyone feasts. 
294 


The Wind Makes Dust 
This more or less typical hunting vignette comes from the !Kung 
San people of the Kalahari Desert, in the Republics of Botswana 
and Namibia, who are now, tragically, on the verge of extinction. 
But for decades they and their way of life were studied by 
anthropologists. The !Kung San may be typical of the hunter-
gatherer mode of existence in which we humans spent most of our 
time, until ten thousand years ago, when plants and animals were 
domesticated and the human condition began to change, perhaps 
forever. They were trackers of such legendary prowess that they 
were enlisted by the apartheid South African army to hunt down 
human prey in the wars against the 'front-line states'. This 
encounter with the white South African military in several differ-
ent ways accelerated the destruction of the !Kung San way of life. 
It had, in any case, been deteriorating bit by bit over the centuries 
from every contact with European civilization. 
How did they do it? How could they tell so much from barely 
more than a glance? Saying they're keen observers explains 
nothing. What actually did they do? According to anthropologist 
Richard Lee: 
They scrutinized the shape of the depressions. The footprints of 
a fast-moving animal display a more elongated symmetry. A 
slightly lame animal favours the afflicted foot, puts less weight on 
it, and leaves a fainter imprint. A heavier animal leaves a deeper 
and broader hollow. The correlation functions are in the heads of 
the hunters. 
In the course of the day, the footprints erode a little. The walls 
of the depression tend to crumble. Windblown sand accumulates 
on the floor of the hollow. Perhaps bits of leaf, twigs or grass are 
blown into it. The longer you wait, the more erosion there is. 
This method is essentially identical to what planetary astrono-
mers use in analysing craters left by impacting worldlets: other 
things being equal, the shallower the crater, the older it is. Craters 
with slumped walls, with modest depth-to-diameter ratios, with 
fine particles accumulated in their interiors tend to be more 
ancient, because they had to be around long enough for these 
erosive processes to come into play. 
The sources of degradation may differ from world to world, or 
desert to desert, or epoch to epoch. But if you know what they are 
295 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
you can determine a great deal from how crisp or blurred the 
crater is. If insect or other animal tracks are superposed on the 
hoofprints, this also argues against their freshness. The subsurface 
moisture content of the soil and the rate at which it dries out after 
being exposed by a hoof determine how crumbly the crater walls 
are. All these matters are closely studied by the !Kung. 
The galloping herd hates the hot Sun. The animals will use 
whatever shade they can find. They will alter course to take brief 
advantage of the shade from a stand of trees. But where the 
shadow is depends on the time of day, because the Sun is moving 
across the sky. In the morning, as the Sun is rising in the east, 
shadows are cast west of the trees. Later in the afternoon, as the 
Sun is setting toward the west, shadows are cast to the east. From 
the swerve of the tracks, it's possible to tell how long ago the 
animals passed. This calculation will be different in different 
seasons of the year. So the hunters must carry in their heads a kind 
of astronomical calendar predicting the apparent solar motion. 
To me, all of these formidable forensic tracking skills are 
science in action. 
Not only are hunter-gatherers expert in the tracks of other 
animals; they also know human tracks very well. Every member of 
the band is recognizable by his or her footprints; they are as 
familiar as their faces. Laurens van der Post recounts, 
[M]any miles from home and separated from the rest, Nxou 
and I, on the track of a wounded buck, suddenly found 
another set of prints and spoor joining our own. He gave a 
deep grunt of satisfaction and said it was Bauxhau's foot-
marks made not many minutes before. He declared Bauxhau 
was running fast and that we would soon see him and the 
animal. We topped the dune in front of us and there was 
Bauxhau, already skinning the animal. 
Or Richard Lee, also among the !Kung San, relates how when 
briefly examining some tracks a hunter commented, 'Oh, look, 
Tunu is here with his brother-in-law. But where is his son?' 
Is this really science? Does every tracker in the course of his 
training sit on his haunches for hours, following the slow degradation 
296 


The Wind Makes Dust 
of an eland hoofprint? When the anthropologist asks this question, 
the answer given is that hunters have always used such methods. 
They observed their fathers and other accomplished hunters during 
their apprenticeships. They learned by imitation. The general princi-
ples were passed down from generation to generation. The local 
variations - wind speed, soil moisture - are updated as needed in 
each generation, or seasonally, or day-by-day. 
But modern scientists do just the same. Every time we try to 
judge the age of a crater on the Moon or Mercury or Triton by its 
degree of erosion, we do not perform the calculation from scratch. 
We dust off a certain scientific paper and read the tried-and-true 
numbers that have been set down perhaps as much as a generation 
earlier. Physicists do not derive Maxwell's equations or quantum 
mechanics from scratch. They try to understand the principles and 
the mathematics, they observe its utility, they note how Nature 
follows these rules, and they take these sciences to heart, making 
them their own. 
Yet someone had to figure out all these tracking protocols for 
the first time, perhaps some palaeolithic genius, or more likely a 
succession of geniuses in widely separated times and places. There 
is no hint in the !Kung tracking protocols of magical methods -
examining the stars the night before or the entrails of an animal, 
or casting dice, or interpreting dreams, or conjuring demons, or 
any of the myriad other spurious claims to knowledge that humans 
have intermittently entertained. Here there's a specific, well-
defined question: which way did the prey go and what are its 
characteristics? You need a precise answer that magic and divina-
tion simply do not provide, or at least not often enough to stave 
off starvation. Instead hunter-gatherers - who are not very 
superstitious in their everyday life, except during trance dances 
around the fire and under the influence of mild euphoriants - are 
practical, workaday, motivated, social, and often very cheerful. 
They employ skills winnowed from past successes and failures. 
Scientific thinking has almost certainly been with us from the 
beginning. You can even see it in chimpanzees when tracking on 
patrol of the frontiers of their territory, or when preparing a reed 
to insert into the termite mound to extract a modest but much-
needed source of protein. The development of tracking skills 
297 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
delivers a powerful evolutionary selective advantage. Those 
groups unable to figure it out get less protein and leave fewer 
offspring. Those with a scientific bent, those able patiently to 
observe, those with a penchant for figuring out acquire more food, 
especially more protein, and live in more varied habitats; they and 
their hereditary lines prosper. The same is true, for instance, of 
Polynesian seafaring skills. A scientific bent brings tangible 
rewards. 
The other principal food-garnering activity of pre-agrarian 
societies is foraging. To forage, you must know the properties of 
many plants, and you must certainly be able to distinguish one 
from another. Botanists and anthropologists have repeatedly 
found that all over the world hunter-gatherer peoples have 
distinguished the various plant species with the precision of 
western taxonomists. They have mentally mapped their territory 
with the finesse of cartographers. Again, all this is a precondition 
for survival. 
So the claim that, just as children are not developmentally 
ready for certain concepts in mathematics or logic, so 'primitive' 
peoples are not intellectually able to grasp science and technol-
ogy, is nonsense. This vestige of colonialism and racism is belied 
by the everyday activities of people living with no fixed abode and 
almost no possessions, the few remaining hunter-gatherers - the 
custodians of our deep past. 
Of Cromer's criteria for 'objective thinking', we can certainly 
find in hunter-gatherer peoples vigorous and substantive debate, 
direct participatory democracy, wide-ranging travel, no priests, 
and the persistence of these factors not for 1,000 but for 300,000 
years or more. By his criteria hunter-gatherers ought to have 
science. I think they do. Or did. 
What Ionia and ancient Greece provided is not so much inven-
tions or technology or engineering, but the idea of systematic 
inquiry, the notion that laws of Nature, rather than capricious 
gods, govern the world. Water, air, earth and fire all had their 
turn as candidate 'explanations' of the nature and origin of the 
world. Each such explanation - identified with a different pre-
Socratic philosopher - was deeply flawed in its details. But the 
298 


The Wind Makes Dust 
mode of explanation, an alternative to divine intervention, was 
productive and new. Likewise, in the history of ancient Greece, 
we can see nearly all significant events driven by the caprice of the 
gods in Homer, only a few events in Herodotus, and essentially 
none at all in Thucydides. In a few hundred years, history passed 
from god-driven to human-driven. 
Something akin to laws of Nature were once glimpsed in a 
determinedly polytheistic society, in which some scholars toyed 
with a form of atheism. This approach of the pre-Socratics was, 
beginning in about the fourth century BC, quenched by Plato, 
Aristotle and then Christian theologians. If the skein of historical 
causality had been different - if the brilliant guesses of the 
atomists on the nature of matter, the plurality of worlds, the 
vastness of space and time had been treasured and built upon, if 
the innovative technology of Archimedes had been taught and 
emulated, if the notion of invariable laws of Nature that humans 
must seek out and understand had been widely propagated - I 
wonder what kind of world we would live in now. 
I don't think science is hard to teach because humans aren't 
ready for it, or because it arose only through a fluke, or because, 
by and large, we don't have the brainpower to grapple with it. 
Instead, the enormous zest for science that I see in first-graders 
and the lesson from the remnant hunter-gatherers both speak 
eloquently: a proclivity for science is embedded deeply within us, 
in all times, places and cultures. It has been the means for our 
survival. It is our birthright. When, through indifference, inatten-
tion, incompetence, or fear of scepticism, we discourage children 
from science, we are disenfranchising them, taking from them the 
tools needed to manage their future. 
299 


19 
No Such Thing as a Dumb Question 
So we keep asking, over and over, 
Until a handful of earth 
Stops our mouths— 
But is that an answer? 
Heinrich Heine, 
'Lazarus' (1854) 
I
n East Africa, in the records of the rocks dating back to about 
two million years ago, you can find a sequence of worked tools 
that our ancestors designed and executed. Their lives depended 
on making and using these tools. This was, of course, Early Stone 
Age technology. Over time, specially fashioned stones were used 
for stabbing, chipping, flaking, cutting, carving. Although there 
are many ways of making stone tools, what is remarkable is that in 
a given site for enormous periods of time the tools were made in 
the same way - which means that there must have been educa-
tional institutions hundreds of thousands of years ago, even if it 
was mainly an apprenticeship system. While it's easy to exagger-
ate the similarities, it's also easy to imagine the equivalent of 
professors and students in loincloths, laboratory courses, exami-
nations, failing grades, graduation ceremonies and postgraduate 
education. 
When the training is unchanged for immense periods of time, 
traditions are passed on intact to the next generation. But when 
300 
