House on Fire 
There, in this burning house, they play, sport, and amuse 
themselves with all sorts of games. They do not know that 
this dwelling is afire, they do not understand it, do not 
perceive it, pay no attention to it, and so they feel no 
agitation. Though threatened by this great [fire], though in 
such close contact with so much ill, they pay no attention to 
their danger, and make no efforts to get out." ' 
from 
The Saddharmapundarika, 
in Buddhist Scriptures, Edward Conze, ed. 
(Penguin Books, 1959) 
O
ne of the reasons it's so interesting to write for Parade 
magazine is feedback. With eighty million readers you can 
really sample the opinion of the citizens of the United States. You 
can understand how people think, what their anxieties and hopes 
are, and even perhaps where we have lost our way. 
An abbreviated version of the preceding chapter, emphasizing 
the performance of students and teachers, was published in 
Parade. I was flooded with mail. Some people denied there was a 
problem; others said that Americans were losing cutting-edge 
intelligence and know-how. Some thought there were easy solu-
tions; others, that the problems were too deeply ingrained to fix. 
Many opinions were a surprise to me. 
A tenth-grade teacher in Minnesota handed out copies of the 
article and asked his students to tell me what they thought. Here's 
what some American high school students wrote (spelling, gram-
mar and punctuation as in the original letters): 
• Not a Americans are stupid We just rank lower in school big deal. 
• Maybe that's good that we are not as smart as the other 
countries. So then we can just import all of our products and 
then we don't have to spend all of our money on the parts for 
the goods. 
• And if other countries are doing better, what does it matter, 
their most likely going to come over the U.S. anyway? 
• Our society is doing just fine with what discoveries we are 
making. It's going slowly, but the cure for cancer is coming 
right along. 
319 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
The U.S. has its own learning system and it may not be as 
advanced as theirs, but it is just as good. Otherwise I think your 
article is a very educating one. 
Not one kid in this school likes science. I really didn't under-
stand the point of the article. I thought that it was very boring. 
I'm just not into anything like that. 
I am studying to be a lawyer and frankly I do agree with my 
parents when they say I have an attitude problem toward science. 
It's true that some American kids don't try, but we could be 
smarter than any other country if we wanted to. 
Instead of homework, kids will watch TV. I have to agree that I 
do it. I have cut it down from about 4 hrs. a day. 
I don't believe it is the school systems fault, I think the whole 
country is brought up with not enough emphasis on school. I 
know my mom would rather be watching me play basketball or 
soccer, instead of helping me with an assignment. Most of the 
kids I know could care less about making sure there doing there 
work right. 
I don't think American kids are stupid. It just they don't study 
hard enough because most of kids work . . . Lots of people said 
that Asian people are smarter than American and they are 
good at everything, but that's not true. They are not good at 
sports. They don't have time to play sports. 
I'm in sports myself, and I feel that the other kids on my team 
push to you to excel more in that sport than in school. 
If we want to rank first, we could go to school all day and not 
have any social life. 
I can see why a lot of science teachers would get mad at you for 
insulting there job. 
Maybe if the teachers could be more exciting, the children will 
want to learn . . . If science is made to be fun, kids will want to 
learn. To accomplish this, it needs to be started early on, not 
just taught as facts and figures. 
I really find it hard to believe those facts about the U.S. in 
science. 
If we are so far behind, how come Michael Gorbachev came to 
Minnesota and Montana to Control Data to see how we run are 
computers and thing? 
320 


House on Fire 
• Around 33 hours for fifth graders! In my opinion thats too 
much that's almost as many hours as a full job practically. So 
instead of homework we can be making money. 
• When you put down how far behind we are in science and 
math, why don't you try tell us this in a little nicer manner? . . . 
Have a little pride in your country and its capabilities. 
• I think your facts were inconclusive and the evidence very 
flimsy. All in all, you raised a good point. 
All in all, these students don't think there's much of a problem; 
and if there is, not much can be done about it. Many also 
complained that the lectures, classroom discussions and home-
work were 'boring'. Especially for an MTV generation beset by 
attention deficit disorders in various degrees of severity, it is 
boring. But spending three or four grades practising once again 
the addition, subtraction, multiplication and division of fractions 
would bore anyone, and the tragedy is that, say, elementary 
probability theory is within reach of these students. Likewise for 
the forms of plants and animals presented without evolution; 
history presented as wars, dates and kings without the role of 
obedience to authority, greed, incompetence and ignorance; 
English without new words entering the language and old words 
disappearing; and chemistry without where the elements come 
from. The means of awakening these students are at hand and 
ignored. Since most school children emerge with only a tiny 
fraction of what they've been taught permanently engraved in 
their long-term memories, isn't it essential to infect them with 
consumer-tested topics that aren't boring . . . and a zest for 
learning? 
Most adults who wrote thought there's a substantial problem. I 
received letters from parents about inquisitive children willing to 
work hard, passionate about science but with no adequate com-
munity or school resources to satisfy their interests. Other letters 
told of parents who knew nothing about science sacrificing their 
own comfort so their children could have science books, micro-
scopes, telescopes, computers or chemistry sets; of parents teach-
ing their children that hard work will get them out of poverty; of a 
grandmother bringing tea to a student up late at night still doing 
321 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
homework; of peer pressure not to do well in school because 'it 
makes the other kids look bad'. 
Here's a sampling - not an opinion poll, but representative 
commentary - of other responses by parents: 
• Do parents understand that you can't be a full human being if 
you're ignorant? Are there books at home? How about a 
magnifying glass? Encyclopedia? Do they encourage children 
to learn? 
• Parents have to teach patience and perseverance. The most 
important gift they can give their children is the ethos of hard 
work, but they can't just talk about it. The kids who learn to 
work hard are the ones who see their parents work hard and 
never give up. 
• My child is fascinated by science, but she doesn't get any in 
school or on TV. 
• My child is identified as gifted, but the school has no program 
for science enrichment. The guidance counselor told me to send 
her to a private school, but we can't afford a private school. 
• There's enormous peer pressure; shy children don't want to 
'stand out' by doing well in science. When my daughter reached 
13 and 14, her life-long interest in science seemed to disappear. 
Parents also had much to say about teachers, and some of the 
comments by teachers echoed the parents. For example, people 
complained that teachers are trained how to teach but not what to 
teach: that a large number of physics and chemistry teachers have 
no degree in physics or chemistry and are 'uncomfortable and 
incompetent' in teaching science; that teachers themselves have 
too much science and maths anxiety; that they resist being asked 
questions, or they answer, 'It's in the book. Look it up.' Some 
complained that the biology teacher was a 'Creationist'; some 
complained that he wasn't. Among other comments by or about 
teachers: 
• We are breeding a collection of half-wits. 
• It's easier to memorize than to think. Kids have to be taught to 
think. 
322 


House on Fire 
• The teachers and curricula are 'dumbing down' to the lowest 
common denominator. 
• Why is the basketball coach teaching chemistry? 
• Teachers are required to spend much too much time on 
discipline and on 'social curricula'. There's no incentive to use 
our own judgment. The 'brass' are always looking over our 
shoulders. 
• Abandon tenure in schools and colleges. Get rid of the 
deadwood. Leave hiring and firing to principals, deans, and 
superintendents. 
• My joy in teaching was repeatedly thwarted by militaristic-type 
principals. 
• Teachers should be rewarded on the basis of performance -
especially student performance on standardized, nationwide 
tests, and improvements in student performance on such tests 
from one year to the next. 
• Teachers are stifling our children's minds by telling them 
they're not 'smart' enough - for example, for a career in 
physics. Why not give the students a chance to take the course? 
• My son was promoted even though he's reading two grade 
levels behind the rest of his class. The reason given was social, 
not educational. He'll never catch up unless he's left back. 
• Science should be required in all school (and especially high 
school) curricula. It should be carefully coordinated with the 
math courses the students are taking at the same time. 
• Most homework is 'busy work' rather than something that 
makes you think. 
• I think Diane Ravitch [New Republic, 6 March 1989] tells it like 
it is: 'As a female student at Hunter High School in New York 
City recently explained, "I make straight As, but I never talk 
about it . . . It's cool to do really badly. If you are interested in 
school and you show it, you're a nerd" . . . The popular culture 
- through television, movies, magazines, and videos - inces-
santly drums in the message to young women that it is better to 
be popular, sexy, and "cool" than to be intelligent, accom-
plished, and outspoken . . .'In 1986 researchers found a similar 
anti-academic ethos among both high school and female students 
in Washington, D.C. They noted that able students faced 
323 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
strong peer pressure not to succeed in school. If they did well in 
their studies, they might be accused of 'acting white'. 
• Schools could easily give much more recognition and rewards 
to kids who are outstanding in science and math. Why don't 
they? Why not special jackets with school letters? Announce-
ments in assembly and the school newspaper and the local 
press? Local industry and social organizations to give special 
awards? This costs very little and could overcome peer pressure 
not to excel. 
• Headstart is the single most effective . . . program for improv-
ing children's understanding of science and everything else. 
There were also many passionate, highly controversial opinions 
expressed which, at the very least, give a sense of how deeply 
people feel about the subject. Here's a smattering: 
• All the smart kids are looking for the fast buck these days, so 
they become lawyers, not scientists. 
• I don't want you to improve education. Then there'd be nobody 
to drive the cabs. 
• The problem in science education is that God isn't sufficiently 
honored. 
• The fundamentalist teaching that science is 'humanism' and is 
to be mistrusted is the reason nobody understands science. 
Religions are afraid of the sceptical thinking at the heart of 
science. Students are brainwashed not to accept scientific 
thinking long before they get to college. 
• Science has discredited itself. It works for politicians. It makes 
weapons, it lies about marijuana 'hazards', it ignores about the 
dangers of agent orange, etc. 
• The public schools don't work. Abandon them. Let's have 
private schools only. 
• We have let the advocates of permissiveness, fuzzy thinking 
and rampant socialism destroy what was once a great educa-
tional system. 
• The school system has enough money. The problem is that the 
white males, usually coaches, who run the schools would never 
(and I mean never) hire an intellectual . . . They care more 
324 


House on Fire 
about the football team than the curriculum and hire only 
submediocre, flag-waving, God-loving automatons to teach. 
What kind of students can emerge from schools that oppress, 
punish and neglect logical thinking? 
• Release schools from the stranglehold of the ACLU [American 
Civil Liberties Union], NEA [National Education Association], 
and others engaged in the breakdown of the discipline and 
competence in the schools. 
• I'm afraid you have no understanding of the country in which 
you live. The people are incredibly ignorant and fearful. They 
will not tolerate listening to any [new] idea . . . Don't you get 
it? The system survives only because it has an ignorant God-
fearing population. There's a reason lots of [educated people] 
are unemployed. 
• I'm sometimes required to explain technological issues to 
Congressional staffers. Believe me, there's a problem in science 
education in this country. 
There is no single solution to the problem of illiteracy in science -
or maths, history, English, geography, and many of the other 
skills which our society needs more of. The responsibilities are 
broadly shared - parents, the voting public, local school boards, 
the media, teachers, administrators, federal, state and logical 
governments, plus, of course, the students themselves. At every 
level teachers complain that the problem lies in earlier grades. 
And first-grade teachers can with justice despair of teaching 
children with learning deficits because of malnutrition, or no 
books in the home, or a culture of violence in which the leisure to 
think is unavailable. 
I know very well from my own experience how much a child can 
benefit from parents who have a little learning and are able to pass 
it on. Even small improvements in the education, communication 
skills and passion for learning in one generation might work much 
larger improvements in the next. I think of this every time I hear a 
complaint that school and collegiate 'standards' are falling, or that 
a Bachelor's degree doesn't 'mean' what it once did. 
Dorothy Rich, an innovative teacher from Yonkers, New York, 
believes that far more important than specific academic subjects is 
325 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
the honing of key skills which she lists as: 'confidence, persever-
ance, caring, teamwork, common sense and problem-solving.' To 
which I'd add sceptical thinking and an aptitude for wonder. 
At the same time, children with special abilities and skills need 
to be nourished and encouraged. They are a national treasure. 
Challenging programmes for the 'gifted' are sometimes decried as 
'elitism'. Why aren't intensive practice sessions for varsity foot-
ball, baseball and basketball players and interschool competition 
deemed elitism? After all, only the most gifted athletes partici-
pate. There is a self-defeating double-standard at work here, 
nationwide. 
The problems in public education in science and other subjects 
run so deep that it's easy to despair and conclude that they can 
never be fixed. And yet, there are institutions hidden away in big 
cities and small towns that provide reason for hope, places that 
strike the spark, awaken slumbering curiosities and ignite the 
scientist that lives in all of us: 
• The enormous metallic iron meteorite in front of you is as full 
of holes as a Swiss cheese. Gingerly you reach out to touch it. It 
feels smooth and cold. The thought occurs to you that this is a 
piece of another world. How did it get to Earth? What 
happened in space to make it so beat up? 
• The display shows maps of eighteenth-century London, and the 
spread of a horrifying cholera epidemic. People in one house 
got it from people in neighbouring houses. By running the wave 
of infection back, you can see where it started. It's like being a 
detective. And when you pinpoint the origin you find it's a 
place with open sewers. It occurs to you that there's a life and 
death reason why modern cities have adequate sanitation. You 
think of all those cities and towns and villages in the world that 
don't. You get to thinking maybe there's a simpler, cheaper 
way to do it . . . 
• You're crawling through a long, utterly black tunnel. There are 
sudden turns, ups and downs. You go through a forest of 
feathery things, beady things, big solid round things. You 
imagine what it must be like to be blind. You think about how 
326 


House on Fire 
little we rely on our sense of touch. In the dark and the quiet, 
you're alone with your thoughts. Somehow the experience is 
exhilarating . . . 
• You examine a detailed reconstruction of a procession of 
priests climbing up one of the great ziggurats of Sumer, or a 
gorgeously painted tomb in the Valley of the Kings in ancient 
Egypt, or a house in ancient Rome, or a full-scale turn-of-the-
century street in small town America. You think of all those 
civilizations, so different from yours, how if you'd been born 
into them you would have thought them completely natural, 
how you'd consider our society - if you had somehow been told 
of it - as weird . . . 
• You squeeze the eyedropper, and a drop of pond water drips 
out on to the microscope stage. You look at the projected 
image. The drop is full of life, strange beings swimming, 
crawling, tumbling; high dramas of pursuit and escape, triumph 
and tragedy. This is a world populated by beings far more 
exotic than in any science-fiction movie . . . 
• Seated in the theatre, you find yourself inside the head of an 
eleven-year-old boy. You look out through his eyes. You 
encounter his typical daily crises: bullies, authoritarian adults, 
crushes on girls. You hear the voice inside his head. You 
witness his neurological and hormonal responses to his social 
environment. And you get to wonder how you work on the 
inside . . . 
• Following the simple instructions, you type in the commands. 
What will the Earth look like if we continue to burn coal, oil 
and gas, and double the amount of carbon dioxide in the 
atmosphere? How much hotter will it be? How much polar ice 
will melt? How much higher will the oceans be? Why are we 
pouring so much carbon dioxide into the atmosphere? What if 
we put five times more carbon dioxide into the atmosphere? 
Also, how could anybody know what the future climate will be 
like? It gets you thinking . . . 
In my childhood, I was taken to the American Museum of Natural 
History in New York City. I was transfixed by the dioramas -
lifelike representations of animals and their habitats all over the 
327 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
world. Penguins on the dimly lit Antarctic ice; okapi in the bright 
African veldt; a family of gorillas, the male beating his chest, in a 
shaded forest glade; an American grizzly bear standing on his hind 
legs, ten or twelve feet tall, and staring me right in the eye. These 
were three-dimensional freeze-frames captured by some genie of 
the lamp. Did the grizzly move just then? Did the gorilla blink? 
Might the genie return, lift the spell and permit this gorgeous 
array of living things to go on with their lives as, jaws agape, I 
watch? 
Kids have an irresistible urge to touch. Back in those days, the 
most commonly heard two words in museums were 'don't touch'. 
Decades ago there was almost nothing 'hands-on' in museums of 
science or natural history, not even a simulated tidal pool in which 
you could pick up a crab and inspect it. The closest thing to an 
interactive exhibit that I knew were the scales in the Hayden 
Planetarium, one for each planet. Weighing a mere forty pounds 
on Earth, there was something reassuring in the thought that if 
only you lived on Jupiter, you would weigh a hundred pounds. 
But sadly, on the Moon you would weigh only seven pounds; on 
the Moon it seemed you would hardly be there at all. 
Today, children are encouraged to touch, to poke, to run 
through a branched contingency tree of questions and answers via 
computer, or to make funny noises and see what the sound waves 
look like. Even kids who don't get everything out of the exhibit, 
or who don't even get the point of the exhibit, usually extract 
something valuable. You go to these museums and you're struck 
by the wide-eyed looks of wonder, by kids racing from exhibit to 
exhibit, by the triumphant smiles of discovery. They're wildly 
popular. Almost as many of us go to them each year as attend 
professional baseball, basketball and football games combined. 
These exhibits do not replace instruction in school or at home, 
but they awaken and excite. A great science museum inspires a 
child to read a book, or take a course, or return to the museum 
again to engage in a process of discovery - and, most important, to 
learn the method of scientific thinking. 
Another glorious feature of many modern scientific museums is 
a movie theatre showing IMAX or OMNIMAX films. In some 
cases the screen is ten storeys tall and wraps around you. The 
328 


House on Fire 
Smithsonian's National Air and Space Museum, the most popular 
museum on Earth, has premiered in its Langley Theater some of 
the best of these films. To Fly brings a catch to my throat even 
after five or six viewings. I've seen religious leaders of many 
denominations witness Blue Planet and be converted on the spot 
to the need to protect the Earth's environment. 
Not every exhibit and science museum is exemplary. A few still 
are commercials for firms that have contributed money to pro-
mote their products - how an automobile engine works or the 
'cleanliness' of one fossil fuel as compared to another. Too many 
museums that claim to be about science are really about tech-
nology and medicine. Too many biology exhibits are still afraid to 
mention the key idea of modern biology: evolution. Beings 
'develop' or 'emerge', but never evolve. The absence of humans 
from the deep fossil record is underplayed. We are shown nothing 
of the anatomical and DNA near-identity between humans and 
chimps or gorillas. Nothing is displayed on complex organic 
molecules in space and on other worlds, nor about experiments 
showing the stuff of life forming in enormous numbers in the 
known atmospheres of other worlds and the presumptive atmos-
phere of the early Earth. A notable exception: the Natural 
History Museum of The Smithsonian Institution once had an 
unforgettable exhibit on evolution. It began with two cockroaches 
in a modern kitchen with open cereal boxes and other food. Left 
alone for a few weeks, the place was crowded with cockroaches, 
buckets of them everywhere, competing for the little food now 
available, and the long-term hereditary advantage that a slightly 
better adapted cockroach might have over its competitors became 
crystal clear. Also, too, many planetaria are still devoted to 
picking out constellations rather than travelling to other worlds, 
and depicting the evolution of galaxies, stars and planets; they 
also have an insect-like projector always visible which robs the sky 
of its reality. 
Perhaps the grandest museum exhibit can't be seen. It has no 
home: George Awad is one of the leading architectural model 
makers in America, specializing in skyscrapers. He is also a 
dedicated student of astronomy who has made a spectacular 
model of the Universe. Starting with a prosaic scene on Earth, and 
329 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
following a scheme proposed by the designers Charles and Ray 
Eames, he goes progressively by factors of ten to show us the 
whole Earth, the Solar System, the Milky Way and the Universe. 
Every astronomical body is meticulously detailed. You can lose 
yourself in them. It's one of the best tools I know of to explain the 
scale and nature of the Universe to children. Isaac Asimov 
described it as 'the most imaginative representation of the uni-
verse that I have ever seen, or could have conceived of. I could 
have wandered through it for hours, seeing something new at 
every turn that I hadn't observed before.' Versions of it ought to 
be available throughout the country - for stirring the imagination, 
for inspiration and for teaching. But instead, Mr Awad cannot 
give this exhibit to any major science museum in the country. No 
one is willing to devote to it the floor space needed. As I write, it 
still sits forlornly, crated in storage. 
The population of my town, Ithaca, New York, doubles to a grand 
total of about 50,000 when Cornell University and Ithaca College 
are in session. Ethnically diverse, surrounded by farmland, it has 
suffered, like so much of the northeast, the decline of its 
nineteenth-century manufacturing base. Half the children at Bev-
erly J. Martin elementary school, which our daughter attended, 
live below the poverty line. Those are the kids that two volunteer 
science teachers, Debbie Levin and Ilma Levine, worried about 
most. It didn't seem right that for some, the children of Cornell 
faculty, say, even the sky wasn't the limit. For others there was no 
access to the liberating power of science education. Starting in the 
1960s, they made regular trips to the school, dragging their 
portable library cart, laden with household chemicals and other 
familiar items to convey something of the magic of science. They 
dreamed of creating a place for kids to go, where they could get a 
personal, hands-on feel for science. 
In 1983 Levin and Levine placed a small ad in our local paper 
inviting the community to discuss the idea. Fifty people showed 
up. From that group came the first board of directors of the 
Sciencenter. Within a year they secured exhibition space in the 
first floor of an unrented office building. When the owner found a 
paying tenant, the tadpoles and litmus paper were packed up 


House on Fire 
again and carted off to a vacant shop. 
Moves to other empty shops followed until an Ithacan named 
Bob Leathers, an architect world-renowned for designing innova-
tive community-built playgrounds, drew up and donated the plans 
for a permanent Sciencenter. Gifts from local firms provided 
enough money to purchase an abandoned lot from the city and 
then hire an executive director, Charles Trautmann, a Cornell 
civil engineer. He and Leathers travelled to the annual meeting of 
the National Association of Homebuilders in Atlanta. Trautmann 
relates how they told the story 'of a community eager to take 
responsibility for the education of its youth and secured donations 
of many key items such as windows, skylights and lumber'. 
Before they could start building, some of the old pumphouse on 
the site had to be torn down. Members of a Cornell fraternity 
were enlisted. With hardhats and sledge-hammers, they demol-
ished the place joyfully. 'This is the kind of thing,' they said, 'we 
usually get into trouble for doing.' In two days, they carted away 
200 tons of rubble. 
What followed were images straight out of an America that 
many of us fear has vanished. In the tradition of pioneer barnrais-
ing, members of the community - bricklayers, doctors, carpen-
ters, university professors, plumbers, farmers, the very young and 
the very old - all rolled up their sleeves to build the Sciencenter. 
'The continuous seven-days-a-week schedule was maintained,' 
says Trautmann, 'so that anyone would be able to help anytime. 
Everyone was given a job. Experienced volunteers built stairs, 
laid carpet and tile, and trimmed windows. Others painted, nailed 
and carried supplies.' Some 2,200 townspeople donated more than 
40,000 hours. Roughly ten per cent of the construction work was 
performed by people convicted of minor offences; they preferred 
to do something for the community than to sit idle in jail. Ten 
months later, Ithaca had the only community-built science 
museum in the world. 
Among the seventy-five interactive exhibits emphasizing both 
the processes and principles of science are: the Magicam, a 
microscope that visitors can use to view on a colour monitor and 
then photograph any object at 40 times magnification; the world's 
only public connection to the satellite-based National Lightning 
331 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
Detection Network; a 6 x 9 ft walk-in camera; a fossil pit seeded 
with local shale where visitors hunt for fossils from 380 million 
years ago and keep their finds; an eight-foot-long boa constrictor 
named 'Spot'; and a dazzling array of other experiments, comput-
ers and activities. 
Levin and Levine can still be found there, full-time volunteers 
teaching the citizens and scientists of the future. The DeWitt 
Wallace-Reader's Digest Fund supports and extends their dream 
of reaching kids who would ordinarily be denied their scientific 
birthright. Through the Fund's nationwide Youth-ALIVE pro-
gramme, Ithaca teenagers receive intensive mentoring to develop 
their science, conflict resolution and employment skills. 
Levin and Levine thought science should belong to everyone. 
Their community agreed and made a commitment to realize that 
dream. In the Sciencenter's first year, 55,000 people came from all 
fifty states and sixty countries. Not bad for a small town. It makes 
you wonder what else we could do if we worked together for a 
better future for our kids. 
332 


21 
The Path to Freedom* 
We must not believe the many, who say that only free 
people ought to be educated, but we should rather believe 
the philosophers who say that only the educated are free. 
Epictetus, Roman philosopher 
and former slave, Discourses 
F
rederick Bailey was a slave. As a boy in Maryland in the 
1820s, he had no mother or father to look after him. ('It is a 
common custom,' he later wrote, 'to part children from their 
mothers . . . before the child has reached its twelfth month.') He 
was one of countless millions of slave children whose realistic 
prospects for a hopeful life were nil. 
What Bailey witnessed and experienced in his growing up 
marked him forever: 'I have often been awakened at the dawn 
of the day by the most heart-rending shrieks of an own aunt of 
mine, whom [the overseer] used to tie up to a joist, and whip 
upon her naked back till she was literally covered with 
blood . . . From the rising till the going down of the sun he was 
cursing, raving, cutting, and slashing among the slaves of the 
field . . . He seemed to take pleasure in manifesting his fiend-
ish barbarity.' 
The slaves had drummed into them, from plantation and pulpit 
* Written with Ann Druyan. 
333 
