THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
guilty of the death of those men. It is admitted that he did 
sincerely believe in the soundness of his ship; but the 
sincerity of his conviction can in nowise help him, because 
he had no right to believe on such evidence as was before 
him. He had acquired his belief not by honestly earning it in 
patient investigation, but by stifling his doubts . . . 
William K. Clifford, 
The Ethics of Belief (1874) 
A
t the borders of science - and sometimes as a carry-over from 
prescientific thinking - lurks a range of ideas that are 
appealing, or at least modestly mind-boggling, but that have not 
been conscientiously worked over with a baloney detection kit, at 
least by their advocates: the notion, say, that the Earth's surface is 
on the inside, not the outside, of a sphere; or claims that you can 
levitate yourself by meditating and that ballet dancers and basket-
ball players routinely get up so high by levitating; or the proposi-
tion that I have something called a soul, made not of matter or 
energy, but of something else for which there is no other evidence, 
and which after my death might return to animate a cow or a 
worm. 
Typical offerings of pseudoscience and superstition - this is 
merely a representative, not a comprehensive list - are astrology; 
the Bermuda Triangle; 'Big Foot' and the Loch Ness monster; 
ghosts; the 'evil eye'; multi-coloured halo-like 'auras' said to 
surround the heads of everyone (with colour personalized); 
extrasensory perception (ESP), such as telepathy, precognition, 
telekinesis, and 'remote viewing' of distant places; the belief that 
13 is an 'unlucky' number (because of which many no-nonsense 
office buildings and hotels in America pass directly from the 
twelfth to the fourteenth floors - why take chances?); bleeding 
statues; the conviction that carrying the severed foot of a rabbit 
around with you brings good luck; divining rods, dowsing and 
water witching; 'facilitated communication' in autism; the belief 
that razor blades stay sharper when kept inside small cardboard 
pyramids, and other tenets of 'pyramidology'; phone calls (none 
of them collect) from the dead; the prophecies of Nostradamus; 
the alleged discovery that untrained flatworms can learn a task by 
208 


Obsessed with Reality 
eating the ground-up remains of other, better educated flatworms; 
the notion that more crimes are committed when the Moon is full; 
palmistry; numerology; polygraphy; comets, tea leaves and 'mon-
strous' births as prodigies of future events (plus the divinations 
fashionable in earlier epochs, accomplished by viewing entrails, 
smoke, the shapes of flames, shadows and excrement; listening to 
gurgling stomachs, and even, for a brief period, examining tables 
of logarithms); 'photography' of past events, such as the crucifix-
ion of Jesus; a Russian elephant that speaks fluently; 'sensitives' 
who, when carelessly blindfolded, read books with their finger-
tips; Edgar Cayce (who predicted that in the 1960s the 'lost' 
continent of Atlantis would 'rise') and other 'prophets', sleeping 
and awake; diet quackery; out-of-body (e.g., near-death) experi-
ences interpreted as real events in the external world; faith-healer 
fraud; Ouija boards; the emotional lives of geraniums, uncovered 
by intrepid use of a 'lie detector'; water remembering what 
molecules used to be dissolved in it; telling character from facial 
features or bumps on the head; the 'hundredth monkey' confusion 
and other claims that whatever a small fraction of us wants to be 
true really is true; human beings spontaneously bursting into 
flame and being burned to a crisp; 3-cycle biorhythms; perpetual 
motion machines, promising unlimited supplies of energy (but all 
of which, for one reason or another, are withheld from close 
examination by sceptics); the systematically inept predictions of 
Jeane Dixon (who 'predicted' a 1953 Soviet invasion of Iran and in 
1965 that the USSR would beat the US to put the first human on 
the Moon*) and other professional 'psychics'; the Jehovah's 
Witnesses' prediction that the world would end in 1917, and many 
similar prophecies; dianetics and Scientology; Carlos Castaneda 
and 'sorcery'; claims of finding the remains of Noah's Ark; the 
'Amityville Horror' and other hauntings; and accounts of a small 
brontosaurus crashing through the rain forests of the Congo 
Republic of our time. [An in-depth discussion of many such claims 
can be found in Encyclopedia of the Paranormal, Gordon Stein, 
* Violating the rules for 'Oraclers and Wizards' given by Thomas Ady in 1656: 
'In doubtful things, they gave doubtful answers . . . Where were more certain 
probabilities, there they gave more certain answers.' 
209 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
ed., Buffalo: Prometheus Books, 1996.] 
Many of these doctrines are rejected out of hand by fundamen-
talist Christians and Jews because the Bible so enjoins. Deuter-
onomy (xviii, 10, 11) reads (in the King James translation): 
There shall not be found among you any one that maketh his 
son or his daughter to pass through the fire, or that useth 
divination, or an observer of times, or an enchanter, or a 
witch. Or a charmer, or a consulter with familiar spirits, or a 
wizard, or a necromancer. 
Astrology, channelling, Ouija boards, predicting the future and 
much else is forbidden. The author of Deuteronomy does not 
argue that such practices fail to deliver what they promise. But 
they are 'abominations', perhaps suitable for other nations, but 
not for the followers of God. And even the Apostle Paul, so 
credulous on so many matters, counsels us to 'prove all things'. 
The twelfth-century Jewish philosopher Moses Maimonides 
goes further than Deuteronomy, in that he makes explicit that 
these pseudosciences don't work: 
It is forbidden to engage in astrology, to utilize charms, to 
whisper incantations . . . All of these practices are nothing 
more than lies and deceptions used by ancient pagan peoples 
to deceive the masses and lead them astray . . . Wise and 
intelligent people know better. [From the Mishneh Torah, 
Avodah Zara, Chapter 11.] 
Some claims are hard to test - for example, if an expedition fails to 
find the ghost or the brontosaurus, that doesn't mean it doesn't 
exist. Absence of evidence is not evidence of absence. Others are 
easier - for example, flatworm cannibalistic learning or the 
announcement that colonies of bacteria subjected to an antibiotic 
or an agar dish thrive when their prosperity is prayed for 
(compared to control bacteria unredeemed by prayer). A few -
for example, perpetual motion machines - can be excluded on 
grounds of fundamental physics. Except for them, it's not that we 
know before examining the evidence that the notions are false; 
210 


Obsessed with Reality 
stranger things are routinely incorporated into the corpus of 
science. 
The question, as always, is how good is the evidence? The 
burden of proof surely rests on the shoulders of those who 
advance such claims. Revealingly, some proponents hold that 
scepticism is a liability, that true science is inquiry without 
scepticism. They are perhaps halfway there. But halfway doesn't 
do it. 
Parapsychologist Susan Blackmore describes one of the steps in 
her transformation to a more sceptical attitude on 'psychic' 
phenomena: 
A mother and daughter from Scotland asserted they could 
pick up images from each other's minds. They chose to use 
playing cards for the tests because that is what they used at 
home. I let them choose the room in which they would be 
tested and insured that there was no normal way for the 
'receiver' to see the cards. They failed. They could not get 
more right than chance predicted and they were terribly 
disappointed. They had honestly believed they could do it 
and I began to see how easy it was to be fooled by your own 
desire to believe. 
I had similar experiences with several dowsers, children 
who claimed they could move objects psychokinetically, and 
several who said they had telepathic powers. They all failed. 
Even now I have a five-digit number, a word, and a small 
object in my kitchen at home. The place and items were 
chosen by a young man who intends to 'see' them while 
travelling out of his body. They have been there (though 
regularly changed) for three years. So far, though, he has had 
no success. 
'Telepathy' literally means to feel at a distance, just as 'telephone' 
is to hear at a distance and 'television' is to see at a distance. The 
word suggests the communication not of thoughts but of feelings, 
emotions. Around a quarter of all Americans believe they've 
experienced something like telepathy. People who know each 
other very well, who live together, who are practised in one 
211 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
another's feeling tones, associations and thinking styles can often 
anticipate what the partner will say. This is merely the usual five 
senses plus human empathy, sensitivity and intelligence in opera-
tion. It may feel extrasensory, but it's not at all what's intended by 
the word 'telepathy'. If something like this were ever conclusively 
demonstrated, it would, I think, have discernible physical causes -
perhaps electrical currents in the brain. Pseudoscience, rightly or 
wrongly labelled, is by no means the same thing as the supernatural, 
which is by definition something somehow outside of Nature. 
It is barely possible that a few of these paranormal claims might 
one day be verified by solid scientific data. But it would be foolish 
to accept any of them without adequate evidence. In the spirit of 
garage dragons, it is much better, for those claims not already 
disproved or adequately explained, to contain our impatience, to 
nurture a tolerance for ambiguity, and to await - or, much better, 
to seek - supporting or disconfirming evidence. 
In a far-off land in the South Seas, the word went out about a wise 
man, a healer, an embodied spirit. He could speak across time. He 
was an Ascended Master. He was coming, they said. He was 
coming . . . 
In 1988, Australian newspapers, magazines and television sta-
tions began to receive the good news via press kits and videotape. 
One broadside read: 
CARLOS 
TO APPEAR IN AUSTRALIA 
Those who have seen it will never forget. The brilliant young 
artist who has been talking to them suddenly seems to falter, 
his pulse slows dangerously and virtually stops at the point of 
death. The qualified medical attendant, who has been 
assigned to keep constant watch, is about to sound the alarm. 
But then, with a heart-stirring burst, the pulse is felt again -
faster and stronger than ever before. The life force clearly has 
returned to the body - but the entity inside that body is no 
longer Jose Luis Alvarez, the 19-year-old whose unique 
painted ceramics are featured in some of the wealthiest 
212 


Obsessed with Reality 
homes in America. Instead, the body has been taken over by 
Carlos, an ancient soul, whose teachings will come as both a 
shock and an inspiration. One being going through a form of 
death to make way for another: that is the phenomenon that 
has made Carlos, as channelled through Jose Luis Alvarez, 
the dominant new figure in New Age consciousness. As even 
one sceptical New York critic puts it: 'The first and only case 
of a channeller offering tangible, physical proof of some 
mysterious change within his human physiology.' 
Now Jose, who has gone through more than 170 of these 
little deaths and transformations, has been told by Carlos to 
visit Australia - in the words of the Master, 'the old new land' 
which is to be the source of a special revelation. Carlos 
already has foretold that in 1988 catastrophes will sweep the 
earth, two major world leaders will die and, later in the year, 
Australians will be among the first to see the rising of a great 
star which will deeply influence future life on earth. 
SUNDAY 21ST 
—3 PM— 
OPERA HOUSE 
DRAMA THEATRE 
Following a 1986 motorcycle accident, the press kit explained, 
Jose Alvarez, then 17 years old, suffered a mild concussion. After 
he recovered, those who knew him could tell that he had changed. 
A very different voice sometimes emanated from him. Bewil-
dered, Alvarez sought help from a psychotherapist, a specialist in 
multiple personality disorders. The psychiatrist 'discovered that 
Jose was channelling a distinct entity who was known as Carlos. 
This entity takes over the body of Alvarez when the body's life 
force is relaxed to the right degree.' Carlos, it turns out, is a 
two-thousand-year-old spirit disincarnate, a ghost without bodily 
form, who last invaded a human body in Caracas, Venezuela, in 
1900. Unfortunately, that body died at age 12 in a fall from a 
horse. This may be why, the therapist explained, Carlos could 
enter Alvarez's body following the motorcycle accident. When 
Alvarez goes into his trance, the spirit of Carlos, focused by a 
213 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
large and rare crystal, enters him and utters the wisdom of the 
ages. 
Included in the press kit was a list of major appearances in 
American cities, a videotape of the tumultuous reception that 
Alvarez/Carlos received at a Broadway theatre, his interview on 
New York radio station WOOP, and other indications that here 
was a formidable American New Age phenomenon. Two small 
substantiating details: an article from a South Florida newspaper 
read, 'THEATER NOTE: The three-day stay of channeler CAR-
LOS has been extended at the War Memorial Auditorium . . . in 
response to the requests for further appearances', and an excerpt 
from a television programme guide listed a special on 'THE 
ENTITY CARLOS: This in-depth study reveals the facts behind 
one of today's most popular and controversial personalities'. 
Alvarez and his manager arrived in Sydney first class on 
Qantas. They travelled everywhere in an enormous white stretch 
limousine. They occupied the Presidential Suite of one of the 
city's most prestigious hotels. Alvarez was attired in an elegant 
white gown with a golden medallion. In his first press conference, 
Carlos quickly emerged. The entity was forceful, literate, com-
manding. Australian television programmes quickly lined up for 
appearances by Alvarez, his manager, and his nurse (to check his 
pulse and announce the presence of Carlos). 
On Australia's Today Show, they were interviewed by the host, 
George Negus. When Negus posed a few reasonable and sceptical 
questions, the New Agers exhibited very thin skins. Carlos laid a 
curse on the anchorman. His manager doused Negus with a glass 
of water. Both stalked off the set. It was a sensation in the tabloid 
press, its significance rehashed on Australian television. 'TV 
Outburst: Water Thrown at Negus', was the front-page headline 
in the 16 February 1988 Daily Mirror. Television stations were 
flooded with calls. One Sydney citizen advised taking the curse on 
Negus very seriously: the army of Satan had already assumed 
control of the United Nations, he said, and Australia might be 
next. 
Carlos's next appearance was on the Australian version of A 
Current Affair. A sceptic was brought in who described a magi-
cian's trick by which the pulse in one hand is made briefly to stop: 
214 


Obsessed with Reality 
you put a rubber ball in your armpit and squeeze. When Carlos's 
authenticity was questioned, he was outraged: 'This interview is 
terminated!' he thundered. 
On the appointed day, the Drama Theatre of the Sydney Opera 
House was nearly filled. An excited crowd, young and old, milled 
about expectantly. Entrance was free, which reassured those who 
vaguely wondered if it might be some sort of scam. Alvarez seated 
himself on a low couch. His pulse was monitored. Suddenly it 
stopped. Seemingly, he was near death. Low, guttural noises 
emanated from deep within him. The audience gasped in wonder 
and awe. Suddenly, Alvarez's body took on power. His posture 
radiated confidence. A broad, humane, spiritual perspective 
flowed out of Alvarez's mouth. Carlos was here! Interviewed 
afterwards, many members of the audience described how they 
had been moved and delighted. 
The following Sunday, Australia's most popular TV programme 
- named Sixty Minutes after its American counterpart - revealed 
that the Carlos affair was a hoax, front to back. The producers 
thought it would be instructive to explore how easily a faith-healer 
or guru could be created to bamboozle the public and the media. 
So naturally, they contacted one of the world's leading experts on 
deceiving the public (at least among those not holding or advising 
political office) - the magician James Randi. 
'[T]here being so many disorders which cure themselves and such 
a disposition in mankind to deceive themselves and one another', 
wrote Benjamin Franklin in 1784 — 
. . . and living long having given me frequent opportunities 
of seeing certain remedies cried up as curing everything, and 
yet soon after totally laid aside as useless, I cannot but fear 
that the expectation of great advantage from the new method 
of treating diseases will prove a delusion. That delusion may 
however in some cases be of use while it lasts. 
He was referring to mesmerism. But 'every age has its peculiar 
folly'. 
Unlike Franklin, most scientists feel it's not their job to expose 
215 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
pseudoscientific bamboozles, much less, passionately held self-
deceptions. They tend not to be very good at it either. Scientists 
are used to struggling with Nature, who may surrender her secrets 
reluctantly but who fights fair. Often they are unprepared for 
those unscrupulous practitioners of the 'paranormal' who play by 
different rules. Magicians, on the other hand, are in the deception 
business. They practise one of the many occupations - such as 
acting, advertising, bureaucratic religion and politics - where what 
a naive observer might misunderstand as lying is socially con-
doned as in the service of a higher good. Many magicians pretend 
they don't cheat, and hint at powers conferred by mystic sources 
or, lately, by alien largesse. Some use their knowledge to expose 
charlatans in and out of their ranks. A thief is set to catch a thief. 
Few rise to this challenge as energetically as James 'The 
Amazing' Randi, accurately self-described as an angry man. He is 
angry not so much about the survival into our day of antediluvian 
mysticism and superstition, but about how uncritical acceptance of 
mysticism and superstition works to defraud, to humiliate, and 
sometimes even to kill. Like all of us, he is imperfect: sometimes 
Randi is intolerant and condescending, lacking in empathy for the 
human frailties that underlie credulity. He is routinely paid for his 
speeches and performances, but nothing compared to what he 
could receive if he declared that his tricks derived from psychic 
powers or divine or extraterrestrial influences. (Most professional 
conjurors, worldwide, seem to believe in the reality of psychic 
phenomena, according to polls of their views.) As a conjuror, he 
has done much to expose remote viewers, 'telepaths', and faith-
healers who have bilked the public. He demonstrated the simple 
deceptions and misdirections by which some psychic spoonbend-
ers had conned prominent theoretical physicists into deducing new 
physical phenomena. He has received wide recognition among 
scientists and is a recipient of the MacArthur Foundation (so-
called 'genius') Prize Fellowship. One critic castigated him for 
being 'obsessed with reality'. I wish the same could be said of our 
nation and our species. 
Randi has done more than anyone else in recent times to expose 
pretension and fraud in the lucrative business of faith-healing. He 
sifts refuse. He reports gossip. He listens in on the stream of 
216 


Obsessed with Reality 
'miraculous' information coming to the itinerant healer - not by 
spiritual inspiration from God, but at the radio frequency of 39.17 
megahertz, transmitted by his wife backstage.* 
He discovers that those who rise from their wheelchairs and are 
declared healed had never before been confined to wheelchairs -
they were invited by an usher to sit in them. He challenges the 
faith-healers to provide serious medical evidence for the validity 
of their claims. He invites local and federal government agencies 
to enforce the laws against fraud and medical malpractice. He 
chastises the news media for their studied avoidance of the issue. 
He exposes the profound contempt of these faith-healers for their 
patients and parishioners. Many are conscious charlatans, using 
Christian evangelical or New Age language and symbols to prey 
on human frailty. Perhaps there are some with motives that are 
not venal. 
Or am I being too harsh? How is the occasional charlatan in 
faith-healing different from the occasional fraud in science? Is it 
fair to be suspicious of an entire profession because of a few bad 
apples? There are at least two important differences, it seems to 
me. First, no one doubts that science actually works, whatever 
mistaken and fraudulent claim may from time to time be offered. 
But whether there are any 'miraculous' cures from faith-healing, 
beyond the body's own ability to cure itself, is very much at issue. 
Secondly, the expose of fraud and error in science is made almost 
exclusively by science. The discipline polices itself, meaning that 
scientists are aware of the potential for charlatanry and mistakes. 
But the exposure of fraud and error in faith-healing is almost 
never done by other faith-healers. Indeed, it is striking how 
reluctant the churches and synagogues are in condemning demon-
strable deception in their midst. 
When conventional medicine fails, when we must confront pain 
and death, of course we are open to other prospects for hope. 
* Whose minions had interviewed the gullible patients only an hour or two 
earlier. How, except through God, could the preacher know their symptoms 
and street addresses? This scam by the Christian fundamentalist faith-healer 
Peter Popoff, and exposed by Randi, was thinly fictionalized in the 1993 film 
Leap of Faith. 
217 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
And, after all, some illnesses are psychogenic. Many can be at 
least ameliorated by a positive cast of mind. Placebos are dummy 
drugs, often sugar pills. Drug companies routinely compare the 
effectiveness of their drugs against placebos given to patients with 
the same disease who had no way to tell the difference between 
the drug and the placebo. Placebos can be astonishingly effective, 
especially for colds, anxiety, depression, pain, and symptoms that 
are plausibly generated by the mind. Conceivably, endorphins -
the small brain proteins with morphine-like effects - can be 
elicited by belief. A placebo works only if the patient believes it's 
an effective medicine. Within strict limits, hope, it seems, can be 
transformed into biochemistry. 
As a typical example, consider the nausea and vomiting that 
frequently accompany the chemotherapy given to cancer and 
AIDS patients. Nausea and vomiting can also be caused psycho-
genically, for instance by fear. The drug ondansetron hydrochlo-
ride greatly reduces the incidence of these symptoms; but is it 
actually the drug or the expectation of relief? In a double-blind 
study 96 per cent of patients rated the drug effective. So did ten 
per cent of the patients taking an identical-looking placebo. 
In an application of the fallacy of observational selection, 
unanswered prayers may be forgotten or dismissed. There is a real 
toll, though: some patients who are not cured by faith reproach 
themselves - perhaps it's their own fault, perhaps they didn't 
believe hard enough. Scepticism, they are rightly told, is an 
impediment both to faith and to (placebo) healing. 
Nearly half of all Americans believe there is such a thing as 
psychic or spiritual healing. Miraculous cures have been associ-
ated with a wide variety of healers, real and imagined, throughout 
human history. Scrofula, a kind of tuberculosis, was in England 
called the 'King's evil', and was supposedly curable only by the 
King's touch. Victims patiently lined up to be touched; the 
monarch briefly submitted to another burdensome obligation of 
high office, and, despite no one, it seems, actually being cured, 
the practice continued for centuries. 
A famous Irish faith-healer of the seventeenth century was 
Valentine Greatraks. He found, somewhat to his surprise, that he 
had the power to cure disease, including colds, ulcers, 'soreness' 
218 


Obsessed with Reality 
and epilepsy. The demand for his services became so great that he 
had no time for anything else. He was forced to become a healer, 
he complained. His method was to cast out the demons responsi-
ble for disease. All diseases, he asserted, were caused by evil 
spirits, many of whom he recognized and called by name. A 
contemporary chronicler, cited by Mackay, noted that 
he boasted of being much better acquainted with the intrigues 
of demons than he was with the affairs of men . . . So great 
was the confidence in him, that the blind fancied they saw the 
light which they did not see - the deaf imagined that they 
heard - the lame that they walked straight, and the paralytic 
that they had recovered the use of their limbs. An idea of 
health made the sick forget for awhile their maladies; and 
imagination, which was not less active in those merely drawn 
by curiosity than in the sick, gave a false view to the one class, 
from the desire of seeing, as it operated a false cure on the 
other from the strong desire of being healed. 
There are countless reports in the world literature of exploration 
and anthropology not only of sicknesses being cured by faith in the 
healer, but also of people wasting away and dying when cursed by 
a sorcerer. A more or less typical example is told by Alvar Nunez 
Cabeza de Vaca, who with a few companions and under condi-
tions of terrible privation wandered on land and sea, from Florida 
to Texas to Mexico in 1528-36. The many different communities 
of Native Americans he met longed to believe in the supernatural 
healing powers of the strange light-skinned, black-bearded for-
eigners and their black-skinned companion from Morocco, Este-
banico. Eventually whole villages came out to meet them, 
depositing all their wealth at the feet of the Spaniards and humbly 
imploring cures. It began modestly enough: 
[T]hey tried to make us into medicine men, without examin-
ing us or asking for credentials, for they cure illnesses by 
blowing on the sick person . . . and they ordered us to do the 
same and be of some use . . . The way in which we cured was 
by making the sign of the cross over them and blowing on 
219 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
them and reciting a Pater Noster and an Ave Maria . . . [A]s 
soon as we made the sign of the cross over them, all those for 
whom we prayed told the others that they were well and 
healthy . . . 
Soon they were curing cripples. Cabeza de Vaca reports he raised 
a man from the dead. After that, 
we were very much hampered by the large number of people 
who were following us . . . their eagerness to come and touch 
us was very great and their importunity so extreme that three 
hours would pass without our being able to persuade them to 
leave us alone. 
When a tribe begged the Spaniards not to leave them, Cabeza de 
Vaca and his companions became angry. Then, 
a strange thing happened . . . [M]any of them fell ill, and 
eight men died the next day. All over the land, in the places 
where this became known, they were so afraid of us that it 
seemed that the very sight of us made them almost die of fear. 
They implored us not to be angry, nor to wish for any more 
of them to die; and they were altogether convinced that we 
killed them simply by wishing to. 
In 1858, an apparition of the Virgin Mary was reported in 
Lourdes, France; the Mother of God confirmed the dogma of her 
immaculate conception which had been proclaimed by Pope Pius 
IX just four years earlier. Something like a hundred million 
people have come to Lourdes since then in the hope of being 
cured, many with illnesses that the medicine of the time was 
helpless to defeat. The Roman Catholic Church rejected the 
authenticity of large numbers of claimed miraculous cures, accept-
ing only sixty-five in nearly a century and a half (of tumours, 
tuberculosis, opthalmitis, impetigo, bronchitis, paralysis and 
other diseases, but not, say, the regeneration of a limb or a 
severed spinal cord). Of the sixty-five, women outnumber men 
ten to one. The odds of a miraculous cure at Lourdes, then, are 
220 


Obsessed with Reality 
about one in a million; you are roughly as likely to recover after 
visiting Lourdes as you are to win the lottery, or to die in the crash 
of a randomly selected regularly scheduled airplane flight -
including the one taking you to Lourdes. 
The spontaneous remission rate of all cancers, lumped together, 
is estimated to be something between one in ten thousand and one 
in a hundred thousand. If no more than five per cent of those who 
come to Lourdes were there to treat their cancers, there should 
have been something between fifty and 500 'miraculous' cures of 
cancer alone. Since only three of the attested sixty-five cures are 
of cancer, the rate of spontaneous remission at Lourdes seems to 
be lower than if the victims had just stayed at home. Of course, if 
you're one of the sixty-five, it's going to be very hard to convince 
you that your trip to Lourdes wasn't the cause of the remission of 
your disease . . . Post hoc, ergo propter hoc. Something similar 
seems true of individual faith-healers. 
After hearing much from his patients about alleged faith-
healing, a Minnesota physician named William Nolen spent a year 
and a half trying to track down the most striking cases. Was there 
clear medical evidence that the disease was really present before 
the 'cure'? If so, had the disease actually disappeared after the 
cure, or did we just have the healer's or the patient's say-so? He 
uncovered many cases of fraud, including the first exposure in 
America of 'psychic surgery'. But he found not one instance of 
cure of any serious organic (non-psychogenic) disease. There were 
no cases where gallstones or rheumatoid arthritis, say, were 
cured, much less cancer or cardiovascular disease. When a child's 
spleen is ruptured, Nolen noted, perform a simple surgical 
operation and the child is completely better. But take that child to 
a faith-healer and she's dead in a day. Dr Nolen's conclusion: 
When [faith]-healers treat serious organic disease, they are 
responsible for untold anguish and unhappiness . . . The 
healers become killers. 
Even a recent book advocating the efficacy of prayer in treating 
disease (Larry Dossey, Healing Words) is troubled by the fact that 
some diseases are more easily cured or mitigated than others. If 
221 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
prayer works, why can't God cure cancer or grow back a severed 
limb? Why so much avoidable suffering that God could so readily 
prevent? Why does God have to be prayed to at all? Doesn't He 
already know what cures need to be performed? Dossey also 
begins with a quote from Stanley Krippner, MD (described as 
'one of the most authoritative investigators of the variety of 
unorthodox healing methods used around the world'): 
[T]he research data on distant, prayer-based healing are 
promising, but too sparse to allow any firm conclusion to be 
drawn. 
This after many trillions of prayers over the millennia. 
As Cabeza de Vaca's experience suggests, the mind can cause 
certain diseases, even fatal diseases. When blindfolded patients 
are deceived into believing they're being touched by a leaf such as 
poison ivy or poison oak, they produce an ugly red contact 
dermatitis. What faith-healing characteristically may help are 
mind-mediated or placebo diseases: some back and knee pains, 
headaches, stuttering, ulcers, stress, hay fever, asthma, hysterical 
paralysis and blindness, and false pregnancy (with cessation of 
menstrual periods and abdominal swelling). These are all diseases 
in which the state of mind may play a key role. In the late 
medieval cures associated with apparitions of the Virgin Mary, 
most were of sudden, short-lived, whole-body or partial paralyses 
that are plausibly psychogenic. It was widely held, moreover, that 
only devout believers could be so cured. It's no surprise that 
appeals to a state of mind called faith can relieve symptoms 
caused, at least in part, by another, perhaps not very different 
state of mind. 
But there's something more: the Harvest Moon Festival is an 
important holiday in traditional Chinese communities in America. 
In the week preceding the festival, the death rate in the commu-
nity is found to fall by 35 per cent. In the following week the death 
rate jumps by 35 per cent. Control groups of non-Chinese show no 
such effect. You might think that suicides are responsible, but 
only deaths from natural causes are counted. You might think that 
stress or overeating might account for it, but this could hardly 
222 


Obsessed with Reality 
explain the fall in death rate before the harvest moon. The largest 
effect is for people with cardiovascular disease, which is known to 
be influenced by stress. Cancer showed a smaller effect. On more 
detailed study, it turned out that the fluctuations in death rate 
occurred exclusively among women 75 years old or older. The 
Harvest Moon Festival is presided over by the oldest women in 
the households. They were able to stave off death for a week or 
two to perform their ceremonial responsibilities. A similar effect 
is found among Jewish men in the weeks centred on Passover - a 
ceremony in which older men play a leading role - and likewise, 
worldwide for birthdays, graduation ceremonies and the like. 
In a more controversial study, Stanford University psychiatrists 
divided eighty-six women with metastatic breast cancer into two 
groups - one in which they were encouraged to examine their 
fears of dying and to take charge of their lives, and the other given 
no special psychiatric support. To the surprise of the researchers, 
not only did the support group experience less pain, but they also 
lived, on average, eighteen months longer. 
The leader of the Stanford study, David Spiegel, speculates that 
the cause may be 
C o r t i s o l and other 'stress hormones' which 
impair the body's protective immune system. Severely depressed 
people, students during exam periods, and the bereaved all have 
reduced white blood cell counts. Good emotional support may not 
have much effect on advanced forms of cancer, but it may work to 
reduce the chances of secondary infections in a person already 
much weakened by the disease or its treatment. 
In his nearly forgotten 1903 book, Christian Science, Mark 
Twain wrote 
The power which a man's imagination has over his body to 
heal it or make it sick is a force which none of us is born 
without. The first man had it, the last one will possess it. 
Occasionally, some of the pain and anxiety or other symptoms of 
more serious diseases can be relieved by faith-healers - however, 
without arresting the progress of the disease. But this is no small 
benefit. Faith and prayer may be able to relieve some symptoms 
of disease and their treatment, ease the suffering of the afflicted 
223 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
and even prolong lives a little. In assessing the religion called 
Christian Science, Mark Twain - its severest critic of the time -
nevertheless allowed that the bodies and lives it had 'made 
whole' by the power of suggestion more than compensated for 
those it had killed by withholding medical treatment in favour 
of prayer. 
After his death, assorted Americans reported contact with the 
ghost of President John F. Kennedy. Before home shrines bearing 
his picture, miraculous cures began to be reported. 'He gave his 
life for his people,' one adherent of this stillborn religion 
explained. According to the Encyclopedia of American Religions, 
'To believers, Kennedy is thought of as a god.' Something similar 
can be seen in the Elvis Presley phenomenon, and the heartfelt 
cry: 'The King lives.' If such belief systems could arise spontane-
ously, think how much more could be done by a well-organized, 
and especially an unscrupulous, campaign. 
In response to their inquiry, Randi suggested to Australia's Sixty 
Minutes that they generate a hoax from scratch, using someone 
with no training in magic or public speaking, and no experience in 
the pulpit. As he was thinking the scam through, his eye fell upon 
Jose Luis Alvarez, a young performance sculptor who was Randi's 
tenant. 'Why not?' answered Alvarez, who when I met him 
seemed bright, good-humoured and thoughtful. He went through 
intensive training, including mock TV appearances and press 
conferences. He didn't have to think up the answers, though, 
because he had a nearly invisible radio receiver in his ear, through 
which Randi prompted. Emissaries from Sixty Minutes checked 
Alvarez's performance. The Carlos personality was Alvarez' 
invention. 
When Alvarez and his 'manager' - likewise recruited for the job 
with no previous experience - arrived in Sydney, there was James 
Randi, slouching and inconspicuous, whispering into his transmit-
ter, at the periphery of the action. The substantiating documenta-
tion had all been faked. The curse, the water-throwing and all the 
rest were rehearsed to attract media attention. They did. Many of 
the people who showed up at the Opera House had done so 
because of the television and press attention. One Australian 
224 


Obsessed with Reality 
newspaper chain even printed verbatim handouts from the 'Carlos 
Foundation'. 
After Sixty Minutes aired, the rest of the Australian media was 
furious. They had been used, they complained, lied to. 'Just as 
there are legal guidelines concerning the police use of provoca-
teurs,' thundered Peter Robinson in the Australian Financial 
Review, 
there must be limits to how far the media can go in setting up 
a misleading situation . . . I, for one, can simply not accept 
that telling a lie is an acceptable way of reporting the 
truth . . . Every poll of public opinion shows that there is a 
suspicion among the general public that the media do not tell 
the whole truth, or that they distort things, or that they 
exaggerate, or that they are biased. 
Mr Robinson feared that Carlos might have lent credence to 
this widespread misperception. Headlines ranged from 'How 
Carlos Made Fools of Them AH' to 'Hoax Was Just Dumb'. 
Newspapers that had not trumpeted Carlos patted themselves 
on the back for their restraint. Negus said of Sixty Minutes, 
'Even people of integrity can make mistakes,' and denied being 
duped. Anyone calling himself a channeller, he said, is 'a fraud 
by definition'. 
Sixty Minutes and Randi stressed that the Australian media had 
made no serious effort to check any of 'Carlos's' bona fides. He 
had never appeared in any of the cities listed. The videotape of 
Carlos on the stage of a New York theatre had been a favour 
granted by the magicians Penn and Teller, who were appearing 
there. They asked the audience just to give a big hand of applause; 
Alvarez, in smock and medallion, walked on; the audience 
dutifully applauded, Randi got his videotape, Alvarez waved 
goodbye, the show went on. And there is no New York City radio 
station with call letters WOOP. 
Other reasons for suspicion could readily be mined in Carlos's 
writings. But because the intellectual currency has been so 
debased, because credulity, New Age and Old, is so rampant, 
because sceptical thinking is so rarely practised, no parody is too 
225 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
implausible. The Carlos Foundation offered for sale (they were 
scrupulously careful not actually to sell anything) an 'Atlantis 
crystal': 
Five of these unique crystals have so far been found by the 
ascended master during his travels. Unexplained by science, 
each crystal harnesses almost pure energy . . . [and has] 
enormous healing powers. The forms are actually fossilized 
spiritual energy and are a great boon to the preparation of the 
Earth for the New Age . . . Of the Five, the ascended master 
wears one Atlantic crystal at all times close to his body for 
protection and to enhance all spiritual activities. Two have 
been acquired by kindly supplicants in the United States of 
America in exchange for the substantial contribution the 
ascended master requests. 
Or, under the heading 'THE WATERS OF CARLOS': 
The ascended master finds occasionally water of such purity 
that he undertakes to energize a quantity of it for others to 
benefit, an intensive process. To produce what is always too 
little, the ascended master purifies himself and a quantity of 
pure quartz crystal fashioned into flasks. He then places 
himself and the crystals into a large copper bowl, polished 
and kept warm. For a twenty-four hour period the ascended 
master pours energy into the spiritual repository of the 
water . . . The water need not be removed from the flask to 
be utilized spiritually. Simply holding the flask and concen-
trating on healing a wound or illness will produce astounding 
results. However, if serious mischance befalls you or a close 
one, a tiny dab of the energized water will immediately assist 
recovery. 
Or, TEARS OF CARLOS': 
The red colour imparted to the holding flasks that the 
ascended master has fashioned for the tears is proof enough 
of their power, but their affect [sic] during meditation has 
226 


Obsessed with Reality 
been described by those who have experienced it as 'a 
glorious Oneness'. 
Then there is a little book, The Teachings of Carlos, which begins: 
I AM CARLOS. 
I HAVE COME TO YOU 
FROM MANY PAST 
INCARNATIONS. 
I HAVE A GREAT LESSON TO 
TEACH YOU. 
LISTEN CAREFULLY. 
READ CAREFULLY. 
THINK CAREFULLY. 
THE TRUTH IS HERE. 
The first teaching asks, 'Why are we here . . .?' The answer: 'Who 
can say what is the one answer? There are many answers to any 
question, and all the answers are right answers. It is so. Do you see?' 
The book enjoins us not to turn to the next page until we have 
understood the page we are on. This is one of several factors that 
makes finishing it difficult. 
'Of doubters,' it reveals later, 'I can say only this: let them take 
from the matter just what they wish. They end up with nothing - a 
handful of space, perhaps. And what does the believer have? 
EVERYTHING! All questions are answered, since all and any 
answers are correct answers. And the answers are right! Argue 
that, doubter.' 
Or: 'Don't ask for explanations of everything. Westerners, in 
particular, are always demanding long-winded descriptions of why 
this, and why that. Most of what is asked is obvious. Why bother 
with probing into these matters? . . . By belief, all things become 
true.' 
The last page of the book displays a single word in large 
227 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
letters: we are exhorted to 'THINK!' 
The full text of The Teachings of Carlos was of course written by 
Randi. He dashed it off on his laptop computer in a few hours. 
The Australian media felt betrayed by one of their own. The 
leading television programme in the country had gone out of its 
way to expose shoddy standards of fact-checking and widespread 
gullibility in institutions devoted to news and public affairs. Some 
media analysts excused it on the grounds that it obviously wasn't 
important; if it had been important, they would have checked it 
out. There were few mea culpas. None who had been taken in 
were willing to appear on a retrospective of the 'Carlos Affair' 
scheduled for the following Sunday on Sixty Minutes. 
Of course, there's nothing special about Australia in all of this. 
Alvarez, Randi, and their co-conspirators could have chosen any 
nation on Earth and it would have worked. Even those who gave 
Carlos a national television audience knew enough to ask some 
sceptical questions - but they couldn't resist inviting him to appear 
in the first place. The internecine struggle within the media 
dominated the headlines after Carlos's departure. Puzzled com-
mentaries were written about the expose. What was the point? 
What was proved? 
Alvarez and Randi proved how little it takes to tamper with our 
beliefs, how readily we are led, how easy it is to fool the public 
when people are lonely and starved for something to believe in. If 
Carlos had stayed longer in Australia and concentrated more on 
healing - by prayer, by believing in him, by wishing on his bottled 
tears, by stroking his crystals - there's no doubt that people would 
have reported being cured of many illnesses, especially psycho-
genic ones. Even with nothing more fraudulent than his appear-
ance, sayings and ancillary products, some people would have 
gotten better because of Carlos. 
This, again, is the placebo effect found with almost every 
faith-healer. We believe we're taking a potent medicine and the 
pain goes away - for a time at least. And when we believe we've 
received a potent spiritual cure, the disease sometimes also goes 
away - for a time at least. Some people spontaneously announce 
that they've been cured even when they haven't. Detailed follow-
ups by Nolen, Randi and many others of those who have been told 
228 


Obsessed with Reality 
they were cured and agreed that they were - in, say, televised 
services by American faith-healers - were unable to find even one 
person with serious organic disease who was in fact cured. Even 
significant improvement in their condition is dubious. As the 
Lourdes experience suggests, you may have to go through ten 
thousand to a million cases before you find one truly startling 
recovery. 
A faith-healer may or may not start out with fraud in mind. But 
to his amazement, his patients actually seem to be improving. 
Their emotions are genuine, their gratitude heart-felt. When the 
healer is criticized, such people rush to his defence. Several 
elderly attendees of the channelling at the Sydney Opera House 
were incensed after the Sixty Minutes expose: 'Never mind what 
they say,' they told Alvarez, 'we believe in you.' 
These successes may be enough to convince many charlatans, 
no matter how cynical they were at the beginning, that they 
actually have mystical powers. Maybe they're not successful every 
time. The powers come and go, they tell themselves. They have to 
cover the down time. If they must cheat a little now and then, it 
serves a higher purpose, they tell themselves. Their spiel is 
consumer-tested. It works. 
Most of these figures are only after your money. That's the 
good news. But what worries me is that a Carlos will come along 
with bigger fish to fry - attractive, commanding, patriotic, exuding 
leadership. All of us long for a competent, uncorrupt, charismatic 
leader. We will leap at the opportunity to support, to believe, to 
feel good. Most reporters, editors and producers, swept up with 
the rest of us, will shy away from real sceptical scrutiny. He won't 
be selling you prayers or crystals or tears. Perhaps he'll be selling 
you a war, or a scapegoat, or a much more all-encompassing 
bundle of beliefs than Carlos's. Whatever it is, it will be accompa-
nied by warnings about the dangers of scepticism. 
In the celebrated film The Wizard of Oz, Dorothy, the Scarecrow, 
the Tin Woodsman and the Cowardly Lion are intimidated - indeed 
awed - by the out-sized oracular figure called the Great Oz. But 
Dorothy's little dog Toto snaps at a concealing curtain and reveals 
that the Great Oz is in fact a machine run by a small, tubby, 
frightened man, as much an exile in this strange land as they. 
229 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
I think we're lucky that James Randi is tugging at the curtain. 
But it would be as dangerous to rely on him to expose all the 
quacks, humbugs and bunkum in the world as it would be to 
believe those same charlatans. If we don't want to get taken, we 
need to do this job for ourselves. 
One of the saddest lessons of history is this: if we've been 
bamboozled long enough, we tend to reject any evidence of the 
bamboozle. We're no longer interested in finding out the truth. 
The bamboozle has captured us. It's simply too painful to 
acknowledge, even to ourselves, that we've been taken. Once you 
give a charlatan power over you, you almost never get it back. So 
the old bamboozles tend to persist as the new ones rise. 
Seances occur only in darkened rooms, where the ghostly 
visitors can be seen dimly at best. If we turn up the lights a little, 
so we have a chance to see what's going on, the spirits vanish. 
They're shy, we're told, and some of us believe it. In twentieth-
century parapsychology laboratories, there is the 'observer effect': 
those described as gifted psychics find that their powers diminish 
markedly whenever sceptics arrive, and disappear altogether in 
the presence of a conjuror as skilled as James Randi. What they 
need is darkness and gullibility. 
A little girl who had been a co-conspirator in a famous 
nineteenth-century flimflam - spirit-rapping, in which ghosts 
answer questions by loud thumping - grew up and confessed it was 
an imposture. She was cracking the joint in her big toe. She 
demonstrated how it was done. But the public apology was largely 
ignored and, when acknowledged, denounced. Spirit-rapping was 
too reassuring to be abandoned merely on the say-so of a 
self-confessed rapper, even if she started the whole business in the 
first place. The story began to circulate that the confession was 
coerced out of her by fanatical rationalists. 
As I described earlier, British hoaxers confessed to having 
made 'crop circles', geometrical figures generated in grain fields. 
It wasn't alien artists working in wheat as their medium, but two 
blokes with a board, a rope and a taste for whimsy. Even when 
they demonstrated how they did it, though, believers were 
unimpressed. Maybe some of the crop circles are hoaxes, they 
230 


Obsessed with Reality 
argued, but there are too many of them, and some of the 
pictograms are too complex. Only extraterrestrials could do it. 
Then others in Britain confessed. But crop circles abroad, it was 
objected, in Hungary for example, how can you explain that? 
Then 
copycat 
Hungarian 
teenagers 
confessed. 
But 
what 
about . . .? 
To test the credulity of an alien abduction psychiatrist, a woman 
poses as an abductee. The therapist is enthusiastic about the 
fantasies she spins. But when she announces it was all a fake, what 
is his response? To re-examine his protocols or his understanding 
of what these cases mean? No. On various days he suggests (1) 
even if she isn't herself aware of it, she was in fact abducted; or (2) 
she's crazy - after all, she went to a psychiatrist, didn't she?; or (3) 
he was on top of the hoax from the beginning and just gave her 
enough rope to hang herself. 
If it's sometimes easier to reject strong evidence than to admit 
that we've been wrong, this is also information about ourselves 
worth having. 
A scientist places an ad in a Paris newspaper offering a free 
horoscope. He receives about 150 replies, each, as requested, 
detailing a place and time of birth. Every respondent is then sent 
the identical horoscope, along with a questionnaire asking how 
accurate the horoscope had been. Ninety-four per cent of the 
respondents (and 90 per cent of their families and friends) reply 
that they were at least recognizable in the horoscope. However, 
the horoscope was drawn up for a French serial killer. If an 
astrologer can get this far without even meeting his subjects, think 
how well someone sensitive to human nuances and not overly 
scrupulous might do. 
Why are we so easily taken in by fortune-tellers, psychic seers, 
palmists, tea-leaf, tarot and yarrow readers, and their ilk? Of 
course, they note our posture, facial expressions, clothing and 
answers to seemingly innocuous questions. Some of them are 
brilliant at it, and these are areas about which many scientists 
seem almost unconscious. There is also a computer network to 
which 'professional' psychics subscribe, the details of their cus-
tomers' lives available to their colleagues in an instant. A key tool 
231 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
is the so-called 'cold read', a statement of opposing predisposi-
tions so tenuously balanced that anyone will recognize a grain of 
truth. Here's an example: 
At times you are extroverted, affable, sociable, while at other 
times you are introverted, wary and reserved. You have 
found it unwise to be too frank in revealing yourself to others. 
You prefer a certain amount of change and variety, and 
become dissatisfied when hemmed in by restrictions and 
limitations. Disciplined and controlled on the outside, you 
tend to be worrisome and insecure on the inside. While you 
have some personality weaknesses, you are generally able to 
compensate for them. You have a great deal of unused 
capacity, which you have not turned to your advantage. You 
have a tendency to be critical of yourself. You have a strong 
need for other people to like you and for them to admire you. 
Almost everyone finds this characterization recognizable, and 
many feel that it describes them perfectly. Small wonder: we are 
all human. 
The list of 'evidence' that some therapists think demonstrates 
repressed childhood sexual abuse (for example, in The Courage to 
Heal by Ellen Bass and Laura Davis) is very long and prosaic: it 
includes sleep disorders, overeating, anorexia and bulimia, sexual 
dysfunction, vague anxieties, and even an inability to remember 
childhood sexual abuse. Another book, by the social worker E. 
Sue Blume, lists, among other telltale signs of forgotten incest: 
headaches, suspicion or its absence, excessive sexual passion or its 
absence, and adoring one's parents. Among diagnostic items for 
detecting 'dysfunctional' families listed by Charles Whitfield, MD, 
are 'aches and pains', feeling 'more alive' in a crisis, being anxious 
about 'authority figures', and having 'tried counseling or psycho-
therapy', yet feeling 'that "something" is wrong or missing'. Like 
the cold read, if the list is long and broad enough, everyone will 
have 'symptoms'. 
Sceptical scrutiny is not only the toolkit for rooting out bunkum 
and cruelty that prey on those least able to protect themselves and 
most in need of our compassion, people offered little other hope. 
232 


Obsessed with Reality 
It is also a timely reminder that mass rallies, radio and television, 
the print media, electronic marketing, and mail-order technology 
permit other kinds of lies to be injected into the body politic, to 
take advantage of the frustrated, the unwary and the defenceless 
in a society riddled with political ills that are being treated 
ineffectively if at all. 
Baloney, bamboozles, careless thinking, flimflam and wishes 
disguised as facts are not restricted to parlour magic and ambigu-
ous advice on matters of the heart. Unfortunately, they ripple 
through mainstream political, social, religious and economic 
issues in every nation. 
233 


14 
Antiscience 
There's no such thing as objective truth. We make our own 
truth. There's no such things as objective reality. We make 
our own reality. There are spiritual, mystical, or inner ways 
of knowing that are superior to our ordinary ways of 
knowing. If an experience seems real, it is real. If an idea 
feels right to you, it is right. We are incapable of acquiring 
knowledge of the true nature of reality. Science itself is 
irrational or mystical. It's just another faith or belief system 
or myth, with no more justification than any other. It 
doesn't matter whether beliefs are true or not, as long as 
they're meaningful to you. 
a summary of New Age beliefs, 
from Theodore Schick Jr and Lewis Vaughn, 
How to Think About Weird Things: 
Critical Thinking for a New Age 
(Mountain View, CA: 
Mayfield Publishing Company, 1995) 
I
f the established framework of science is plausibly in error (or 
arbitrary, or irrelevant, or unpatriotic, or impious, or mainly 
serving the interests of the powerful), then perhaps we can save 
ourselves the trouble of understanding what so many people think 
of as a complex, difficult, highly mathematical, and counterintui-
tive body of knowledge. Then all the scientists would have their 
234 
