No Such Thing as a Dumb Question 
what needs to be learned changes quickly, especially in the course 
of a single generation, it becomes much harder to know what to 
teach and how to teach it. Then, students complain about 
relevance; respect for their elders diminishes. Teachers despair at 
how educational standards have deteriorated, and how lackadaisi-
cal students have become. In a world in transition, students and 
teachers both need to teach themselves one essential skill -
learning how to learn. 
Except for children (who don't know enough not to ask the 
important questions), few of us spend much time wondering why 
Nature is the way it is; where the Cosmos came from, or whether 
it was always here; if time will one day flow backward, and effects 
precede causes; or whether there are ultimate limits to what 
humans can know. There are even children, and I have met some 
of them, who want to know what a black hole looks like; what is 
the smallest piece of matter; why we remember the past and not 
the future; and why there is a Universe. 
Every now and then, I'm lucky enough to teach a kindergarten 
or first-grade class. Many of these children are natural-born 
scientists - although heavy on the wonder side and light on 
scepticism. They're curious, intellectually vigorous. Provocative 
and insightful questions bubble out of them. They exhibit enor-
mous enthusiasm. I'm asked follow-up questions. They've never 
heard of the notion of a 'dumb question'. 
But when I talk to high school seniors, I find something 
different. They memorize 'facts'. By and large, though, the joy of 
discovery, the life behind those facts, has gone out of them. 
They've lost much of the wonder, and gained very little scepti-
cism. They're worried about asking 'dumb' questions; they're 
willing to accept inadequate answers; they don't pose follow-up 
questions; the room is awash with sidelong glances to judge, 
second-by-second, the approval of their peers. They come to class 
with their questions written out on pieces of paper, which they 
surreptitiously examine, waiting their turn and oblivious of what-
ever discussion their peers are at this moment engaged in. 
Something has happened between first and twelfth grade, and 
it's not just puberty. I'd guess that it's partly peer pressure not to 
301 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
excel (except in sports); partly that the society teaches short-term 
gratification; partly the impression that science or mathematics 
won't buy you a sports car; partly that so little is expected of 
students; and partly that there are few rewards or role models for 
intelligent discussion of science and technology - or even for 
learning for its own sake. Those few who remain interested are 
vilified as 'nerds' or 'geeks' or 'grinds'. 
But there's something else: I find many adults are put off when 
young children pose scientific questions. Why is the Moon round? 
the children ask. Why is grass green? What is a dream? How deep 
can you dig a hole? When is the world's birthday? Why do we 
have toes? Too many teachers and parents answer with irritation 
or ridicule, or quickly move on to something else: 'What did you 
expect the Moon to be, square?' Children soon recognize that 
somehow this kind of question annoys the grown-ups. A few more 
experiences like it, and another child has been lost to science. 
Why adults should pretend to omniscience before 6-year-olds, I 
can't for the life of me understand. What's wrong with admitting 
that we don't know something? Is our self-esteem so fragile? 
What's more, many of these questions go to deep issues in 
science, a few of which are not yet fully resolved. Why the Moon 
is round has to do with the fact that gravity is a central force 
pulling towards the middle of any world, and with how strong 
rocks are. Grass is green because of the pigment chlorophyll, of 
course - we've all had that drummed into us by high schools - but 
why do plants have chlorophyll? It seems foolish, since the Sun 
puts out its peak energy in the yellow and green part of the 
spectrum. Why should plants all over the world reject sunlight in 
its most abundant wavelengths? Maybe it's a frozen accident from 
the ancient history of life on Earth. But there's something we still 
don't understand about why grass is green. 
There are many better responses than making the child feel that 
asking deep questions constitutes a social blunder. If we have an 
idea of the answer, we can try to explain. Even an incomplete 
attempt constitutes a reassurance and encouragement. If we have 
no idea of the answer, we can go to the encyclopedia. If we don't 
have an encyclopedia, we can take the child to the library. Or we 
might say: 'I don't know the answer. Maybe no one knows. Maybe 
302 


No Such Thing as a Dumb Question 
when you grow up, you'll be the first person to find out.' 
There are naive questions, tedious questions, ill-phrased ques-
tions, questions put after inadequate self-criticism. But every 
question is a cry to understand the world.* There is no such thing 
as a dumb question. 
Bright, curious children are a national and world resource. 
They need to be cared for, cherished, and encouraged. But mere 
encouragement isn't enough. We must also give them the essential 
tools to think with. 
'It's Official', reads one newspaper headline: 'We Stink in Sci-
ence'. In tests of average 17-year-olds in many world regions, the 
US ranked dead last in algebra. On identical tests, the US kids 
averaged 43% and their Japanese counterparts 78%. In my book, 
78% is pretty good - it corresponds to a C+, or maybe even a B-; 
43% is an F. In a chemistry test, students in only two of 13 nations 
did worse than the US. Britain, Singapore and Hong Kong were 
so high they were almost off-scale, and 25% of Canadian 18-year-
olds knew just as much chemistry as a select 1% of American high 
school seniors (in their second chemistry course, and most of them 
in 'advanced' placement programmes). The best of 20 fifth-grade 
classrooms in Minneapolis was outpaced by every one of 20 
classrooms in Sendai, Japan, and 19 out of 20 in Taipei, Taiwan. 
South Korean students were far ahead of American students in all 
aspects of mathematics and science, and 13-year-olds in British 
Columbia (in western Canada) outpaced their US counterparts 
across the board (in some areas they did better than the Koreans). 
Of the US kids, 22% say they dislike school; only 8% of the 
Koreans do. Yet two-thirds of the Americans, but only a quarter 
of the Koreans, say they are 'good at mathematics'. 
Such dismal trends for average students in the United States are 
occasionally offset by the performance of outstanding students. In 
1994, American students at the International Mathematical Olym-
piad in Hong Kong achieved an unprecedented perfect score, 
defeating 360 other students from 68 nations in algebra, geometry 
* I'm excluding the fusillade of 'whys' that two-year-olds sometimes pelt their 
parents with - perhaps in an effort to control adult behaviour. 
303 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
and number theory. One of them, 17-year-old Jeremy Bem, 
commented 'Maths problems are logic puzzles. There's no routine 
- it's all very creative and artistic' But here I'm concerned not 
with producing a new generation of first-rate scientists and 
mathematicians, but a scientifically literate public. 
Sixty-three per cent of American adults are unaware that the 
last dinosaur died before the first human arose; 75 per cent do not 
know that antibiotics kill bacteria but not viruses; 57 per cent do 
not know that 'electrons are smaller than atoms'. Polls show that 
something like half of American adults do not know that the Earth 
goes around the Sun and takes a year to do it. I can find in my 
undergraduate classes at Cornell University bright students who 
do not know that the stars rise and set at night, or even that the 
Sun is a star. 
Because of science fiction, the educational system, NASA, and 
the role that science plays in society, Americans have much more 
exposure to the Copernican insight than does the average human. 
A 1993 poll by the China Association of Science and Technology 
shows that, as in America, no more than half the people in China 
know that the Earth revolves around the Sun once a year. It may 
very well be, then, that more than four and a half centuries after 
Copernicus, most people on Earth still think, in their heart of 
hearts, that our planet sits immobile at the centre of the Universe, 
and that we are profoundly 'special'. 
These are typical questions in 'scientific literacy'. The results 
are appalling. But what do they measure? The memorization of 
authoritative pronouncements. What they should be asking is how 
we know - that antibiotics discriminate between microbes, that 
electrons are 'smaller' than atoms, that the Sun is a star which the 
Earth orbits once a year. Such questions are a much truer measure 
of public understanding of science, and the results of such tests 
would doubtless be more disheartening still. 
If you accept the literal truth of every word of the Bible, then 
the Earth must be flat. The same is true for the Qu'ran. 
Pronouncing the Earth round then means you're an atheist. In 
1993, the supreme religious authority of Saudi Arabia, Sheik 
Abdel-Aziz Ibn Baaz, issued an edict, or fatwa, declaring that the 
world is flat. Anyone of the round persuasion does not believe in 
304 


No Such Thing as a Dumb Question 
God and should be punished. Among many ironies, the lucid 
evidence that the Earth is a sphere, accumulated by the second-
century Graeco-Egyptian astronomer Claudius Ptolemaeus, was 
transmitted to the west by astronomers who were Muslim and 
Arab. In the ninth century, they named Ptolemy's book in which 
the sphericity of the Earth is demonstrated, the Almagest, 'The 
Greatest'. 
I meet many people offended by evolution, who passionately 
prefer to be the personal handicraft of God than to arise by blind 
physical and chemical forces over aeons from slime. They also tend 
to be less than assiduous in exposing themselves to the evidence. 
Evidence has little to do with it: what they wish to be true, they 
believe is true. Only nine per cent of Americans accept the central 
finding of modern biology that human beings (and all the other 
species) have slowly evolved by natural processes from a succes-
sion of more ancient beings with no divine intervention needed 
along the way. (When asked merely if they accept evolution, 45 
per cent of Americans say yes. The figure is 70 per cent in China.) 
When the movie Jurassic Park was shown in Israel, it was 
condemned by some Orthodox rabbis because it accepted evolu-
tion and because it taught that dinosaurs lived a hundred million 
years ago, when, as is plainly stated at every Rosh Hashanah and 
every Jewish wedding ceremony, the Universe is less than 6,000 
years old. The clearest evidence of our evolution can be found in 
our genes. But evolution is still being fought, ironically by those 
whose own DNA proclaims it - in the schools, in the courts, in 
textbook publishing houses, and on the question of just how much 
pain we can inflict on other animals without crossing some ethical 
threshold. 
During the Great Depression in America, teachers enjoyed job 
security, good salaries, respectability. Teaching was an admired 
profession, partly because learning was widely recognized as the 
road out of poverty. Little of that is true today. And so science 
(and other) teaching is too often incompetently or uninspiringly 
done, its practitioners, astonishingly, having little or no training in 
their subjects, impatient with the method and in a hurry to get to 
the findings of science - and sometimes themselves unable to 
distinguish science from pseudoscience. Those who do have the 
305 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
training often get higher-paying jobs elsewhere. 
Children need hands-on experience with the experimental 
method rather than just reading about science in a book. We can 
be told about oxidation of wax as the explanation of the candle 
flame. But we have a much more vivid sense of what's going on if 
we witness the candle burning briefly in a bell jar until the carbon 
dioxide produced by the burning surrounds the wick, blocks 
access to oxygen, and the flame flickers and dies. We can be 
taught about mitochondria in cells, how they mediate the oxida-
tion of food like the flame burning the wax, but it's another thing 
altogether to see them under the microscope. We may be told that 
oxygen is necessary for the life of some organisms and not others. 
But we begin really to understand when we test the proposition in 
a bell jar fully depleted of oxygen. What does oxygen do for us? 
Why do we die without it? Where does the oxygen in the air come 
from? How secure is the supply? 
Experiment and the scientific method can be taught in many 
matters other than science. Daniel Kunitz is a friend of mine from 
college. He's spent his life as an innovative junior and senior high 
school social sciences teacher. Want the students to understand 
the Constitution of the United States? You could have them read 
it, Article by Article, and then discuss it in class but, sadly, this 
will put most of them to sleep. Or you could try the Kunitz 
method: you forbid the students to read the Constitution. Instead, 
you assign them, two for each state, to attend a Constitutional 
Convention. You brief each of the thirteen teams in detail on the 
particular interests of their state and region. The South Carolina 
delegation, say, would be told of the primacy of cotton, the 
necessity and morality of the slave trade, the danger posed by the 
industrial north, and so on. The thirteen delegations assemble, 
and with a little faculty guidance, but mainly on their own, over 
some weeks write a constitution. Then they read the real Consti-
tution. The students have reserved war-making powers to the 
President. The delegates of 1787 assigned them to Congress. 
Why? The students have freed the slaves. The original Constitu-
tional Convention did not. Why? This takes more preparation by 
the teachers and more work by the students, but the experience is 
unforgettable. It's hard not to think that the nations of the Earth 
306 


No Such Thing as a Dumb Question 
would be in better shape if every citizen went through a compara-
ble experience. 
We need more money for teachers' training and salaries, and 
for laboratories. But all across America, school-bond issues are 
regularly voted down. No one suggests that property taxes be used 
to provide for the military budget, or for agriculture subsidies, or 
for cleaning up toxic wastes. Why just education? Why not 
support it from general taxes on the local and state levels? What 
about a special education tax for those industries with special 
needs for technically trained workers? 
American schoolchildren don't do enough schoolwork. There 
are 180 days in the standard school year in the United States, as 
compared with 220 in South Korea, about 230 in Germany, and 
243 in Japan. Children in some of these countries go to school on 
Saturday. The average American high school student spends 3.5 
hours a week on homework. The total time devoted to studies, in 
and out of the classroom, is about 20 hours a week. Japanese 
fifth-graders average 33 hours a week. Japan, with half the 
population of the United States, produces twice as many scientists 
and engineers with advanced degrees every year. 
During four years of high school, American students spend less 
than 1,500 hours on such subjects as mathematics, science and 
history. Japanese, French and German students spend more than 
twice as much time. A 1994 report commissioned by the US 
Department of Education notes: 
The traditional school day must now fit in a whole set of 
requirements for what has been called the 'new work of the 
schools' - education about personal safety, consumer affairs, 
AIDS, conservation and energy, family life and driver's 
training. 
So, because of the deficiencies of society and the inadequacies of 
education in the home, only about three hours a day are spent in 
high school on the core academic subjects. 
There's a widely held perception that science is 'too hard' for 
ordinary people. We can see this reflected in the statistic that only 
around 10 per cent of American high school students ever opt for 
307 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
a course in physics. What makes science suddenly 'too hard'? Why 
isn't it too hard for the citizens of all those other countries that are 
outperforming the United States? What has happened to the 
American genius for science, technical innovation and hard work? 
Americans once took enormous pride in their inventors, who 
pioneered the telegraph, telephone, electric light, phonograph, 
automobile and airplane. Except for computers, all that seems a 
thing of the past. Where did all that 'Yankee ingenuity' go? 
Most American children aren't stupid. Part of the reason they 
don't study hard is that they receive few tangible benefits when 
they do. Competency (that is, actually knowing the stuff) in verbal 
skills, mathematics, science and history these days doesn't 
increase earnings for average young men in their first eight years 
out of high school, many of whom take service rather than 
industrial jobs. 
In the productive sectors of the economy, though, the story is 
often different. There are furniture factories, for example, in 
danger of going out of business - not because there are no 
customers, but because so few entry-level workers can do simple 
arithmetic. A major electronics company reports that 80 per cent 
of its job applicants can't pass a fifth-grade mathematics test. The 
United States already is losing some $40 billion a year (mainly in 
lost productivity and the cost of remedial education) because 
workers, to too great a degree, can't read, write, count or think. 
In a survey by the US National Science Board of 139 high 
technology companies in the United States, the chief causes of the 
research and development decline attributable to national policy 
were (1) lack of a long-term strategy for dealing with the problem; 
(2) too little attention paid to the training of future scientists and 
engineers; (3) too much investment in 'defence', and not enough 
in civilian research and development; and (4) too little attention 
paid to pre-college education. Ignorance feeds on ignorance. 
Science phobia is contagious. 
Those in America with the most favourable view of science tend 
to be young, well-to-do, college-educated white males. But three-
quarters of new American workers in the next decade will be 
women, nonwhites and immigrants. Failing to rouse their enthusi-
asm, to say nothing of discriminating against them, isn't only 
308 


No Such Thing as a Dumb Question 
unjust, it's also stupid and self-defeating. It deprives the economy 
of desperately needed skilled workers. 
African-American and Hispanic students are doing significantly 
better in standardized science tests now than in the late 1960s, but 
they're the only ones who are. The average maths gap between 
white and black US high school graduates is still huge - two to 
three grade levels; but the gap between white US high school 
graduates and those in, say, Japan, Canada, Great Britain or 
Finland is more than twice as large (with the US students behind). 
If you're poorly motivated and poorly educated, you won't know 
much - no mystery there. Suburban African-Americans with 
college-educated parents do just as well in college as suburban 
whites with college-educated parents. According to some statis-
tics, enrolling a poor child in a Head Start programme doubles his 
or her chances to be employed later in life; one who completes an 
Upward Bound programme is four times as likely to get a college 
education. If we're serious, we know what to do. 
What about college and university? There are obvious steps to 
take: improved status based on teaching success, and promotions 
of teachers based on the performance of their students in stand-
ardized, double-blind tests; salaries for teachers that approach 
what they could get in industry; more scholarships, fellowships 
and laboratory equipment; imaginative, inspiring curricula and 
textbooks in which the leading faculty members play a major role; 
laboratory courses required of everyone to graduate; and special 
attention paid to those traditionally steered away from science. 
We should also encourage the best academic scientists to spend 
more time on public education - textbooks, lectures, newspaper 
and magazine articles, TV appearances. And a mandatory fresh-
man or sophomore (first- or second-year) course in sceptical 
thinking and the methods of science might be worth trying. 
The mystic William Blake stared at the Sun and saw angels there, 
while others, more worldly, 'perceived only an object of about the 
size and colour of a golden guinea'. Did Blake really see angels in 
the Sun, or was it some perceptual or cognitive error? I know of 
no photograph of the Sun that shows anything of the sort. Did 
Blake see what the camera and the telescope cannot? Or does the 
309 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
explanation lie much more inside Blake's head than outside? And 
is not the truth of the Sun's nature as revealed by modern science 
far more wonderful: no mere angels or gold coin, but an enormous 
sphere into which a million Earths could be packed, in the core of 
which the hidden nuclei of atoms are being jammed together, 
hydrogen transfigured into helium, the energy latent in hydrogen 
for billions of years released, the Earth and other planets warmed 
and lit thereby, and the same process repeated four hundred 
billion times elsewhere in the Milky Way galaxy? 
The blueprints, detailed instructions, and job orders for build-
ing you from scratch would fill about 1,000 encyclopedia volumes 
if written out in English. Yet every cell in your body has a set of 
these encyclopedias. A quasar is so far away that the light we see 
from it began its intergalactic voyage before the Earth was 
formed. Every person on Earth is descended from the same 
not-quite-human ancestors in East Africa a few million years ago, 
making us all cousins. 
Whenever I think about any of these discoveries, I feel a tingle of 
exhilaration. My heart races. I can't help it. Science is an astonish-
ment and a delight. Every time a spacecraft flies by a new world, I 
find myself amazed. Planetary scientists ask themselves: 'Oh, is that 
the way it is? Why didn't we think of that?' But nature is always more 
subtle, more intricate, more elegant than what we are able to 
imagine. Given our manifest human limitations, what is surprising is 
that we have been able to penetrate so far into the secrets of Nature. 
Nearly every scientist has experienced, in a moment of discov-
ery or sudden understanding, a reverential astonishment. Science 
- pure science, science not for any practical application but for its 
own sake - is a deeply emotional matter for those who practise it, 
as well as for those nonscientists who every now and then dip in to 
see what's been discovered lately. 
And, as in a detective story, it's a joy to frame key questions, to 
work through alternative explanations, and maybe even to 
advance the process of scientific discovery. Consider these exam-
ples, some very simple, some not, chosen more or less at random: 
• Could there be an undiscovered integer between 6 and 7? 
• Could there be an undiscovered chemical element between 
310 


No Such Thing as a Dumb Question 
atomic number 6 (which is carbon) and atomic number 7 (which 
is nitrogen)? 
• Yes, the new preservative causes cancer in rats. But what if you 
have to give a person, who weighs much more than a rat, a 
pound a day of the stuff to induce cancer? In that case, maybe 
the new preservative isn't all that dangerous. Might the benefit 
of having food preserved for long periods outweigh the small 
additional risk of cancer? Who decides? What data do they 
need to make a prudent decision? 
• In a 3.8 billion-year-old rock, you find a ratio of carbon isotopes 
typical of living things today, and different from inorganic sedi-
ments. Do you deduce abundant life on Earth 3.8 billion years 
ago? Or could the chemical remains of more modern organisms 
have infiltrated into the rock? Or is there a way for isotopes to 
separate in the rock apart from biological processes? 
• Sensitive measurements of electrical currents in the human 
brain show that when certain memories or mental processes 
occur, particular regions of the brain go into action. Can our 
thoughts, memories and passions all be generated by particular 
circuitry of the brain neurons? Might it ever be possible to 
simulate such circuitry in a robot? Would it ever be feasible to 
insert new circuits or alter old ones in the brain in such a way as 
to change opinions, memories, emotions, logical deductions? Is 
such tampering wildly dangerous? 
• Your theory of the origin of the solar system predicts many flat 
discs of gas and dust all over the Milky Way galaxy. You look 
through the telescope and you find flat discs everywhere. You 
happily conclude that your theory is confirmed. But it turns out 
the discs you sighted were spiral galaxies far beyond the Milky 
Way, and much too big to be nascent solar systems. Should you 
abandon your theory? Or should you look for a different kind 
of disc? Or is this just an expression of your unwillingness to 
abandon a discredited hypothesis? 
• A growing cancer sends out an all-points bulletin to the cells 
lining adjacent blood vessels: 'We need blood,' the message 
says. The endothelial cells obligingly build blood vessel bridges 
to supply the cancer cells with blood. How does this come 
about? Can the message be intercepted or cancelled? 
311 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
• You mix violet, blue, green, yellow, orange and red paints and 
make a murky brown. Then you mix light of the same colours 
and you get white. What's going on? 
• In the genes of humans and many other animals there are long, 
repetitive sequences of hereditary information (called 'non-
sense'). Some of these sequences cause genetic diseases. Could 
it be that segments of the DNA are rogue nucleic acids, 
reproducing on their own, in business for themselves, disdain-
ing the well-being of the organism they inhabit? 
• Many animals behave strangely just before an earthquake. 
What do they know that seismologists don't? 
• The ancient Aztec and the ancient Greek words for 'God' are 
nearly the same. Is this evidence of some contact or commonal-
ity between the two civilizations, or should we expect occa-
sional such coincidences between two wholly unrelated 
languages merely by chance? Or could, as Plato thought in the 
Cratylus, certain words be built into us from birth? 
• The Second Law of Thermodynamics states that in the Universe 
as a whole, disorder increases as time goes on. (Of course, locally 
worlds and life and intelligence can emerge, at the cost of a 
decrease in order elsewhere in the Universe.) But if we live in a 
Universe in which the present Big Bang expansion will slow, stop, 
and be replaced by a contraction, might the Second Law then be 
reversed? Can effects precede causes? 
• The human body uses concentrated hydrochloric acid in the 
stomach to dissolve food and aid digestion. Why doesn't the 
hydrochloric acid dissolve the stomach? 
• The oldest stars seem to be, at the time I'm writing, older than 
the Universe. Like the claim that an acquaintance has children 
older than she is, you don't have to know very much to 
recognize that someone has made a mistake. Who? 
• The technology now exists to move individual atoms around, so 
long and complex messages can be written on an ultra-
microscopic scale. It is also possible to make machines the size 
of molecules. Rudimentary examples of both these 'nano-
technologies' are now well demonstrated. Where does this take 
us in another few decades? 
• In several different laboratories, complex molecules have been 
312 


No Such Thing as a Dumb Question 
found that under suitable conditions make copies of themselves in 
the test tube. Some of these molecules are, like DNA and RNA, 
built out of nucleotides; others are not. Some use enzymes to 
hasten the pace of the chemistry; others do not. Sometimes there 
is a mistake in copying; from that point forward the mistake is 
copied in successive generations of molecules. Thus there get to 
be slightly different species of self-replicating molecules, some of 
which reproduce faster or more efficiently than others. These 
preferentially thrive. As time goes on, the molecules in the test 
tube become more and more efficient. We are beginning to 
witness the evolution of molecules. How much insight does this 
provide about the origin of life? 
• Why is ordinary ice white, but pure glacial ice blue? 
• Life has been found miles below the surface of the Earth. How 
deep does it go? 
• The Dogon people in the Republic of Mali are said by a French 
anthropologist to have a legend that the star Sirius has an 
extremely dense companion star. Sirius in fact does have such a 
companion, although it requires fairly sophisticated astronomy to 
detect it. So (1) did the Dogon people descend from a forgotten 
civilization that had large optical telescopes and theoretical astro-
physics? Or, (2) were they instructed by extraterrestrials? Or, (3) 
did the Dogon hear about the white dwarf companion of Sirius 
from a visiting European? Or, (4) was the French anthropologist 
mistaken and the Dogon in fact never had such a legend? 
Why should it be hard for scientists to get science across? Some 
scientists, including some very good ones, tell me they'd love to 
popularize, but feel they lack talent in this area. Knowing and 
explaining, they say, are not the same thing. What's the secret? 
There's only one, I think: don't talk to the general audience as 
you would to your scientific colleagues. There are terms that 
convey your meaning instantly and accurately to fellow experts. 
You may parse these phrases every day in your professional work. 
But they do no more than mystify an audience of non-specialists. 
Use the simplest possible language. Above all, remember how it 
was before you yourself grasped whatever it is you're explaining. 
Remember the misunderstandings that you almost fell into, and 
313 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
note them explicitly. Keep firmly in mind that there was a time 
when you didn't understand any of this either. Recapitulate the 
first steps that led you from ignorance to knowledge. Never forget 
that native intelligence is widely distributed in our species. 
Indeed, it is the secret of our success. 
The effort involved is slight, the benefits great. Among the 
potential pitfalls are oversimplification, the need to be sparing 
with qualifications (and quantifications), inadequate credit given 
to the many scientists involved, and insufficient distinctions drawn 
between helpful analogy and reality. Doubtless, compromises 
must be made. 
The more you make such presentations, the clearer it is which 
approaches work and which do not. There is a natural selection of 
metaphors, images, analogies, anecdotes. After a while you find 
that you can get almost anywhere you want to go, walking on 
consumer-tested stepping-stones. You can then fine-tune your 
presentations for the needs of a given audience. 
Like some editors and television producers, some scientists 
believe the public is too ignorant or too stupid to understand 
science, that the enterprise of popularization is fundamentally a 
lost cause, or even that it's tantamount to fraternization, if not 
outright cohabitation, with the enemy. Among the many criti-
cisms that could be made of this judgement - along with its 
insufferable arrogance and its neglect of a host of examples of 
highly successful science popularizations - is that it is self-
confirming. And also, for the scientists involved, self-defeating. 
Large-scale government support for science is fairly new, dating 
back only to World War Two - although patronage of a few 
scientists by the rich and powerful is much older. With the end of 
the Cold War, the national defence trump card that provided 
support for all sorts of fundamental science became virtually 
unplayable. Only partly for this reason, most scientists, I think, 
are now comfortable with the idea of popularizing science. (Since 
nearly all support for science comes from the public coffers, it 
would be an odd flirtation with suicide for scientists to oppose 
competent popularization.) What the public understands and 
appreciates, it is more likely to support. I don't mean writing 
articles for Scientific American, say, that are read by science 
314 


No Such Thing as a Dumb Question 
enthusiasts and scientists in other fields. I'm not just talking about 
teaching introductory courses for undergraduates. I'm talking about 
efforts to communicate the substance and approach of science in 
newspapers, magazines, on radio and television, in lectures for the 
general public, and in elementary, middle and high school textbooks. 
Of course there are judgement calls to be made in popularizing. 
It's important neither to mystify nor to patronize. In attempting to 
prod public interest, scientists have on occasion gone too far - for 
example, in drawing unjustified religious conclusions. Astrono-
mer George Smoot described his discovery of small irregularities 
in the ratio radiation left over from the Big Bang as 'seeing God 
face-to-face'. Physics Nobel laureate Leon Lederman described 
the Higgs boson, a hypothetical building block of matter, as 'the 
God particle', and so titled a book. (In my opinion, they're all 
God particles.) If the Higgs boson doesn't exist, is the God 
hypothesis disproved? Physicist Frank Tipler proposes that com-
puters in the remote future will prove the existence of God and 
work our bodily resurrection. 
Periodicals and television can strike sparks as they give us a 
glimpse of science, and this is very important. But - apart from 
apprenticeship or well-structured classes and seminars - the best 
way to popularize science is through textbooks, popular books, 
CD-ROMs and laser discs. You can mull things over, go at your 
own pace, revisit the hard parts, compare texts, dig deep. It has to 
be done right, though, and in the schools especially it generally 
isn't. There, as the philosopher John Passmore comments, science 
is often presented 
as a matter of learning principles and applying them by 
routine procedures. It is learned from textbooks, not by 
reading the works of great scientists or even the day-to-day 
contributions to the scientific literature . . . The beginning 
scientist, unlike the beginning humanist, does not have an 
immediate contact with genius. Indeed . . . school courses 
can attract quite the wrong sort of person into science -
unimaginative boys and girls who like routine. 
I hold that popularization of science is successful if, at first, it does 
315 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
no more than spark the sense of wonder. To do that, it is sufficient 
to provide a glimpse of the findings of science without thoroughly 
explaining how those findings were achieved. It is easier to 
portray the destination than the journey. But, where possible, 
popularizers should try to chronicle some of the mistakes, false 
starts, dead ends and apparently hopeless confusion along the 
way. At least every now and then, we should provide the evidence 
and let the reader draw his or her own conclusion. This converts 
obedient assimilation of new knowledge into personal discovery. 
When you make the finding yourself - even if you're the last 
person on Earth to see the light - you never forget it. 
As a youngster, I was inspired by the popular science books 
and articles of George Gamow, James Jeans, Arthur Edding-
ton, J.B.S. Haldane, Julian Huxley, Rachel Carson and Arthur 
C. Clarke - all of them trained in, and most of them leading 
practitioners of science. The popularity of well-written, well-
explained, deeply imaginative books on science that touch our 
hearts as well as our minds seems greater in the last twenty 
years than ever before, and the number and disciplinary 
diversity of scientists writing these books is likewise unprec-
edented. Among the best contemporary scientist-popularizers, 
I think of Stephen Jay Gould, E.O. Wilson, Lewis Thomas and 
Richard Dawkins in biology; Steven Weinberg, Alan Lightman 
and Kip Thorne in physics; Roald Hoffmann in chemistry; and 
the early works of Fred Hoyle in astronomy. Isaac Asimov 
wrote capably on everything. (And while requiring calculus, the 
most consistently exciting, provocative and inspiring science 
popularization of the last few decades seems to me to be 
Volume I of Richard Feynman's Introductory Lectures on 
Physics.) Nevertheless, current efforts are clearly nowhere near 
commensurate with the public good. And, of course, if we can't 
read, we can't benefit from such works, no matter how inspiring 
they are. 
I want us to rescue Mr 'Buckley' and the millions like him. I also 
want us to stop turning out leaden, incurious, uncritical and 
unimaginative high school seniors. Our species needs, and 
deserves, a citizenry with minds wide awake and a basic under-
standing of how the world works. 
316 


No Such Thing as a Dumb Question 
Science, I maintain, is an absolutely essential tool for any 
society with a hope of surviving well into the next century with its 
fundamental values intact - not just science as engaged in by its 
practitioners, but science understood and embraced by the entire 
human community. And if the scientists will not bring this about, 
who will? 
317 


20 
House on Fire* 
The Lord [Buddha] replied to the Venerable Sariputra: 
'In some village, city, market town, country district, 
province, kingdom, or capital there lived a householder, 
old, advanced in years, decrepit, weak in health and 
strength, but rich, wealthy, and well-to-do. His house was a 
large one, both extensive and high, and it was old, having 
been built a long time ago. It was inhabited by many living 
beings, some two, three, four, or five hundred. It had one 
single door only. It was thatched with straw, its terraces had 
fallen down, its foundations were rotten, its walls, 
matting-screens, and plaster were in an advanced state of 
decay. Suddenly a great blaze of fire broke out, and the 
house started burning on all sides. And that man had many 
young sons, five, or ten, or twenty, and he himself got out of 
the house. 
'When that man saw his own house ablaze all around with 
the great mass of fire, he became afraid and trembled, his 
mind became agitated, and he thought to himself: "I, it is 
true, have been competent enough to run out of the door, 
and to escape from my burning house, quickly and safely, 
without being touched or scorched by that great mass of fire. 
But what about my sons, my young boys, my little sons? 
* Written with Ann Druyan. 
318 
