THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
your sexual parts. If you're a man, they may take sperm 
samples; if you're a woman, they may remove ova or foetuses, 
or implant semen. They may force you to have sex. Afterwards 
you may be ushered into a different room where hybrid babies 
or foetuses, partly human and partly like these creatures, stare 
back at you. You may be given an admonition about human 
misbehaviour, especially in despoiling the environment or in 
allowing the AIDS pandemic; tableaux of future devastation 
are offered. Finally, these cheerless grey emissaries escort you 
out of the spacecraft and ooze you back through the walls into 
your bed. By the time you're able to move and talk . . . they're 
gone. 
You may not remember the incident right away. Instead you 
might simply find some period of time unaccountably missing, and 
puzzle over it. Because all this seems so weird, you're a little 
concerned about your sanity. Naturally you're reluctant to talk 
about it. At the same time the experience is so disturbing that it's 
hard to keep it bottled up. It all pours out when you hear of 
similar accounts, or when you're under hypnosis with a sympa-
thetic therapist, or even when you see a picture of an 'alien' in one 
of the many popular magazines, books, and TV 'specials' on 
UFOs. Some people say they can recall such experiences from 
early childhood. Their own children, they think, are now being 
abducted by aliens. It runs in families. It's a eugenics programme, 
they say, to improve the human breeding stock. Maybe aliens 
have always done this. Maybe, some say, that's where humans 
came from in the first place. 
As revealed by repeated polls over the years, most Americans 
believe that we're being visited by extraterrestrial beings in UFOs. 
In a 1992 Roper opinion poll of nearly 6,000 American adults -
especially commissioned by those who accept the alien abduction 
story at face value - 18 per cent reported sometimes waking up 
paralysed, aware of one or more strange beings in the room. 
About 13 per cent reported odd episodes of missing time, and 10 
per cent claimed to have flown through the air without mechanical 
assistance. From nothing more than these results, the poll's 
sponsors conclude that two per cent of all Americans have been 
abducted, many repeatedly, by beings from other worlds. The 
62 


Aliens 
question of whether respondents had been abducted by aliens was 
never actually put to them. 
If we believed the conclusion drawn by those who bankrolled 
and interpreted the results of this poll, and if aliens are not partial 
to Americans, then the number for the whole planet would be 
more than a hundred million people. This means an abduction 
every few seconds over the past few decades. It's surprising more 
of the neighbours haven't noticed. 
What's going on here? When you talk with self-described 
abductees, most seem very sincere, although caught in the grip of 
powerful emotions. Some psychiatrists who've examined them say 
they find no more evidence of psychopathology in them than in 
the rest of us. Why should anyone claim to have been abducted by 
alien creatures if it never happened? Could all these people be 
mistaken, or lying, or hallucinating the same (or a similar) story? 
Or is it arrogant and contemptuous even to question the good 
sense of so many? 
On the other hand, could there really be a massive alien 
invasion; repugnant medical procedures performed on millions of 
innocent men, women and children; humans apparently used as 
breeding stock over many decades - and all this not generally 
known and dealt with by responsible media, physicians, scientists 
and the governments sworn to protect the lives and well-being of 
their citizens? Or, as many have suggested, is there a massive 
government conspiracy to keep the citizens from the truth? 
Why should beings so advanced in physics and engineering -
crossing vast interstellar distances, walking like ghosts through 
walls - be so backward when it comes to biology? Why, if the 
aliens are trying to do their business in secret, wouldn't they 
perfectly expunge all memories of the abductions? Too hard for 
them to do? Why are the examining instruments macroscopic and 
so reminiscent of what can be found at the neighbourhood medical 
clinic? Why go to all the trouble of repeated sexual encounters 
between aliens and humans? Why not steal a few egg and sperm 
cells, read the full genetic code, and then manufacture as many 
copies as you like with whatever genetic variations happen to suit 
your fancy? Even we humans, who as yet cannot quickly cross 
interstellar space or slither through walls, are able to clone cells. 
63 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
How could humans be the result of an alien breeding programme 
if we share 99.6 per cent of our active genes with the chimpan-
zees? We're more closely related to chimps than rats are to mice. 
The preoccupation with reproduction in these accounts raises a 
warning flag, especially considering the uneasy balance between 
sexual impulse and societal repression that has always character-
ized the human condition, and the fact that we live in a time 
fraught with numerous ghastly accounts, both true and false, of 
childhood sexual abuse. 
Contrary to many media reports,* the Roper pollsters and 
those who wrote the 'official' report never asked whether their 
subjects had been abducted by aliens. They deduced it: those 
who've ever awakened with strange presences around them, 
who've ever unaccountably seemed to fly through the air, and 
so on, have therefore been abducted. The pollsters didn't even 
check to see if sensing presences, flying etc. were part of the 
same or separate incidents. Their conclusion - that millions of 
Americans have been so abducted - is spurious, based on 
careless experimental design. 
Still, at least hundreds of people, perhaps thousands, claiming 
they have been abducted, have sought out sympathetic therapists 
or joined abductee support groups. Others may have similar 
complaints but, fearing ridicule or the stigma of mental illness, 
have refrained from speaking up or getting help. 
Some abductees are also said to be reluctant to talk for fear of 
hostility and rejection by hardline sceptics (although many will-
ingly appear on radio and TV talk shows). Their diffidence 
supposedly extends even to audiences that already believe in alien 
abductions. But maybe there's another reason: might the subjects 
themselves be unsure - at least at first, at least before many 
retellings of their story - whether it was an external event they are 
remembering or a state of mind? 
'One unerring mark of the love of truth,' wrote John Locke in 
* For example, the 4 September 1994 Publisher's Weekly: 'According to a Gallup 
[sic] poll, more than three million Americans believe they have been abducted 
by aliens.' 
64 


Aliens 
1690, 'is not entertaining any proposition with greater assurance 
than the proofs it is built upon will warrant.' On the matter of 
UFOs, how strong are the proofs? 
The phrase 'flying saucer' was coined when I was entering high 
school. The newspapers were full of stories about ships from 
beyond in the skies of Earth. It seemed pretty believable to me. 
There were lots of other stars, at least some of which probably had 
planetary systems like ours. Many stars were as old or older than 
the Sun, so there was plenty of time for intelligent life to evolve. 
Caltech's Jet Propulsion Laboratory had just flown a two-stage 
rocket high above the Earth. Clearly we were on our way to the 
Moon and the planets. Why shouldn't other, older, wiser beings 
be able to travel from their star to ours? Why not? 
This was only a few years after the bombing of Hiroshima and 
Nagasaki. Maybe the UFO occupants were worried about us, and 
sought to help us. Or maybe they wanted to make sure that we 
and our nuclear weapons didn't come and bother them. Many 
people seemed to see flying saucers - sober pillars of the commu-
nity, police officers, commercial airplane pilots, military person-
nel. And apart from some harumphs and giggles, I couldn't find 
any counterarguments. How could all these eyewitnesses be 
mistaken? What's more, the saucers had been picked up on radar, 
and pictures had been taken of them. You could see the photos in 
newspapers and glossy magazines. There were even reports about 
crashed flying saucers and little alien bodies with perfect teeth 
stiffly languishing in Air Force freezers in the southwest. 
The prevailing climate was summarized in Life magazine a few 
years later, in these words: 'These objects cannot be explained by 
present science as natural phenomena - but solely as artificial 
devices, created and operated by a high intelligence.' Nothing 
'known or projected on Earth could account for the performance 
of these devices.' 
And yet not a single adult I knew was preoccupied with UFOs. I 
couldn't figure out why not. Instead they were worried about 
Communist China, nuclear weapons, McCarthyism and the rent. I 
wondered if they had their priorities straight. 
In college, in the early 1950s, I began to learn a little about how 
science works, the secrets of its great success, how rigorous the 
65 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
standards of evidence must be if we are really to know something 
is true, how many false starts and dead ends have plagued human 
thinking, how our biases can colour our interpretation of the 
evidence, and how often belief systems widely held and supported 
by the political, religious and academic hierarchies turn out to be 
not just slightly in error, but grotesquely wrong. 
I came upon a book called Extraordinary Popular Delusions 
and the Madness of Crowds written by Charles Mackay in 1841 
and still in print. In it could be found the histories of boom-and-
bust economic crazes, including the Mississippi and South Sea 
'Bubbles' and the extravagant run on Dutch tulips, scams that 
bamboozled the wealthy and titled of many nations; a legion of 
alchemists, including the poignant tale of Mr Kelly and Dr Dee 
(and Dee's 8-year-old son Arthur, impressed by his desperate 
father into communicating with the spirit world by peering into a 
crystal); dolorous accounts of unfulfilled prophecy, divination and 
fortune-telling; the persecution of witches; haunted houses; 
'popular admiration of great thieves'; and much else. Entertain-
ingly portrayed was the Count of St Germain, who dined out on 
the cheerful pretension that he was centuries old if not actually 
immortal. (When, at dinner, incredulity was expressed at his 
recounting of his conversations with Richard the Lion-Heart, he 
turned to his man-servant for confirmation. 'You forget, sir,' was 
the reply, 'I have been only five hundred years in your service.' 
'Ah, true,' said St Germain, 'it was a little before your time.') 
A riveting chapter on the Crusades began 
Every age has its peculiar folly; some scheme, project, or 
phantasy into which it plunges, spurred on either by the love 
of gain, the necessity of excitement, or the mere force of 
imitation. Failing in these, it has some madness, to which it is 
goaded by political or religious causes, or both combined. 
The edition I first read was adorned by a quote from the financier 
and adviser of Presidents, Bernard M. Baruch, attesting that 
reading Mackay had saved him millions. 
There had been a long history of spurious claims that magnet-
ism could cure disease. Paracelsus, for example, used a magnet to 
66 


Aliens 
suck diseases out of the human body and dispose of them into the 
Earth. But the key figure was Franz Mesmer. I had vaguely 
understood the word 'mesmerize' to mean something like hypno-
tize. But my first real knowledge of Mesmer came from Mackay. 
The Viennese physician had thought that the positions of the 
planets influenced human health, and was caught up in the 
wonders of electricity and magnetism. He catered to the declining 
French nobility on the eve of the Revolution. They crowded into a 
darkened room. Dressed in a gold-flowered silk robe and waving 
an ivory wand, Mesmer seated his marks around a vat of dilute 
sulphuric acid. The Magnetizer and his young male assistants 
peered deeply into the eyes of their patients, and rubbed their 
bodies. They grasped iron bars protruding into the solution or 
held each other's hands. In contagious frenzy, aristocrats -
especially young women - were cured left and right. 
Mesmer became a sensation. He called it 'animal magnetism'. 
For the more conventional medical practitioner, though, this was 
bad for business, so French physicians pressured King Louis XVI 
to crack down. Mesmer, they said, was a menace to public health. 
A commission was appointed by the French Academy of Sciences 
that included the pioneering chemist Antoine Lavoisier, and the 
American diplomat and expert on electricity, Benjamin Franklin. 
They performed the obvious control experiment: when the mag-
netizing effects were performed without the patient's knowledge, 
no cures were effected. The cures, if any, the commission 
concluded, were all in the mind of the beholder. Mesmer and his 
followers were undeterred. One of them later urged the following 
attitude of mind for best results: 
Forget for a while all of your knowledge of physics . . . 
Remove from your mind all objections that may occur . . . 
Never reason for six weeks . . . Be very credulous; be very 
persevering; reject all past experience, and do not listen to 
reason. 
Oh, yes, a final piece of advice: 'Never magnetize before inquisi-
tive persons.' 
Another eye-opener was Martin Gardner's Fads and Fallacies in 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
the Name of Science. Here was Wilhelm Reich uncovering the key 
to the structure of galaxies in the energy of the human orgasm; 
Andrew Crosse creating microscopic insects electrically from 
salts; Hans Horbiger under Nazi aegis announcing that the Milky 
Way was made not of stars, but of snowballs; Charles Piazzi 
Smyth discovering in the dimensions of the Great Pyramid of 
Gizeh a world chronology from the Creation to the Second 
Coming; L. Ron Hubbard writing a manuscript able to drive its 
readers insane (was it ever proofed? I wondered); the Bridey 
Murphy case, which led millions into concluding that at last there 
was serious evidence of reincarnation; Joseph Rhine's 'demon-
strations' of ESP; appendicitis cured by cold water enemas, 
bacterial diseases by brass cylinders, and gonorrhoea by green 
light - and amid all these accounts of self-deception and charla-
tanry, to my surprise a chapter on UFOs. 
Of course, merely by writing books cataloguing spurious 
beliefs, Mackay and Gardner came across, at least a little, as 
grumpy and superior. Was there nothing they accepted? Still, it 
was stunning how many passionately argued and defended claims 
to knowledge had amounted to nothing. It slowly dawned on me 
that, human fallibility being what it is, there might be other 
explanations for flying saucers. 
I had been interested in the possibility of extraterrestrial life 
from childhood, from long before I ever heard of flying saucers. 
I've remained fascinated long after my early enthusiasm for UFOs 
waned - as I understood more about that remorseless taskmaster 
called the scientific method: everything hinges on the matter of 
evidence. On so important a question, the evidence must be 
airtight. The more we want it to be true, the more careful we have 
to be. No witness's say-so is good enough. People make mistakes. 
People play practical jokes. People stretch the truth for money or 
attention or fame. People occasionally misunderstand what 
they're seeing. People sometimes even see things that aren't 
there. 
Essentially all the UFO cases were anecdotes, something 
asserted. UFOs were described variously as rapidly moving or 
hovering; disc-shaped, cigar-shaped, or ball-shaped; moving 
silently or noisily; with a fiery exhaust, or with no exhaust at all; 
68 


Aliens 
accompanied by flashing lights, or uniformly glowing with a 
silvery cast, or self-luminous. The diversity of the observations 
hinted that they had no common origin, and that the use of such 
terms as UFOs or 'flying saucers' served only to confuse the issue 
by grouping generically a set of unrelated phenomena. 
There was something odd about the very invention of the 
phrase 'flying saucer'. As I write this chapter, I have before me a 
transcript of a 7 April 1950 interview between Edward R. 
Murrow, the celebrated CBS newsman, and Kenneth Arnold, a 
civilian pilot who saw something peculiar near Mount Rainier in 
the state of Washington on 24 June 1947 and who in a way coined 
the phrase. Arnold claims that the newspapers 
did not quote me properly . . . When I told the press they 
misquoted me, and in the excitement of it all, one newspaper 
and another one got it so ensnarled up that nobody knew just 
exactly what they were talking about . . . These objects more 
or less fluttered like they were, oh, I'd say, boats on very 
rough water . . . And when I described how they flew, I said 
that they flew like they take a saucer and throw it across the 
water. Most of the newspapers misunderstood and misquoted 
that, too. They said that I said that they were saucer-like; I 
said that they flew in a saucer-like fashion. 
Arnold thought he saw a train of nine objects, one of which 
produced a 'terrific blue flash'. He concluded they were a new 
kind of winged aircraft. Murrow summed up: 'That was an 
historic misquote. While Mr Arnold's original explanation has 
been forgotten, the term "flying saucer" has become a house-
hold word.' Kenneth Arnold's flying saucers looked and 
behaved quite differently from what in only a few years would 
be rigidly particularized in the public understanding of the 
term: something like a very large and highly manoeuverable 
frisbee. 
Most people honestly reported what they saw, but what they 
saw were natural, if unfamiliar, phenomena. Some UFO sightings 
turned out to be unconventional aircraft, conventional aircraft 
with unusual lighting patterns, high-altitude balloons, luminescent 
69 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
insects, planets seen under unusual atmospheric conditions, opti-
cal mirages and looming, lenticular clouds, ball lightning, sun-
dogs, meteors including green fireballs, and satellites, nosecones, 
and rocket boosters spectacularly re-entering the atmosphere.* 
Just conceivably, a few might be small comets dissipating in the 
upper air. At least some radar reports were due to 'anomalous 
propagation' - radio waves travelling curved paths due to atmos-
pheric temperature inversions. Traditionally, they were also 
called radar 'angels' - something that seems to be there but isn't. 
You could have simultaneous visual and radar sightings without 
there being any 'there' there. 
When we notice something strange in the sky, some of us 
become excitable and uncritical, bad witnesses. There was the 
suspicion that the field attracted rogues and charlatans. Many 
UFO photos turned out to be fakes - small models hanging by thin 
threads, often photographed in a double exposure. A UFO seen 
by thousands of people at a football game turned out to be a 
college fraternity prank - a piece of cardboard, some candles and 
a thin plastic bag that dry cleaning comes in, all cobbled together 
to make a rudimentary hot air balloon. 
The original crashed saucer account (with the little alien men 
and their perfect teeth) turned out to be a straight hoax. Frank 
Scully, columnist for Variety, passed on a story told by an oilman 
friend; it played a central dramatic role in Scully's best-selling 
1950 book, Behind the Flying Saucers. Sixteen dead aliens from 
Venus, each three feet high, had been found in one of three 
crashed saucers. Booklets with alien pictograms had been recov-
ered. The military was covering up. The implications were pro-
found. 
The hoaxers were Silas Newton, who said he used radio waves 
to prospect for gold and oil, and a mysterious 'Dr Gee' who 
turned out to be a Mr GeBauer. Newton produced a gear from the 
UFO machinery and flashed close-up saucer photos. But he did 
not allow close inspection. When a prepared sceptic, through 
* There are so many artificial satellites up there that they're always making 
garish displays somewhere in the world. Two or three decay every day in the 
Earth's atmosphere, the flaming debris often visible to the naked eye. 
70 


Aliens 
sleight of hand, switched gears and sent the alien artefact away for 
analysis, it turned out to be made of kitchen-pot aluminium. 
The crashed saucer scam was a small interlude in a quarter-
century of frauds by Newton and GeBauer, chiefly selling worth-
less oil leases and prospecting machines. In 1952 they were 
arrested by the FBI, and the following year found guilty of 
conducting a confidence game. Their exploits, chronicled by the 
historian Curtis Peebles, ought to have made UFO enthusiasts 
cautious forever about crashed saucer stories from the American 
Southwest around 1950. No such luck. 
On 4 October 1957, Sputnik 1, the first Earth-orbiting artificial 
satellite, was launched. Of 1,178 recorded UFO sightings in 
America that year, 701 or 60 per cent - rather than the 25 per cent 
you'd expect - occurred between October and December. The 
clear implication is that Sputnik and its attendant publicity some-
how generated UFO reports. Perhaps people were looking at the 
night sky more and saw more natural phenomena they didn't 
understand. Or could it be they looked up more and saw more of 
the alien spacecraft that are there all the time? 
The idea of flying saucers had dubious antecedents, tracing 
back to a conscious hoax entitled I Remember Lemuria!, 
written by Richard Shaver, and published in the March 1945 
number of the pulp fiction periodical Amazing Stories. It was 
exactly the sort of stuff I devoured as a child. Lost continents 
were settled by space aliens 150,000 years ago, I was informed, 
leading to the creation of a race of demonic underground beings 
responsible for human tribulations and the existence of evil. 
The editor of the magazine, Ray Palmer - who was, like the 
subterranean beings he warned about, roughly four feet high -
promoted the notion, well before Arnold's sighting, that the 
Earth is being visited by disc-shaped alien spacecraft and that 
the government is covering up its knowledge and complicity. 
Merely from the newsstand covers of such magazines, millions 
of Americans were exposed to the idea of flying saucers well 
before the term was coined. 
All in all, the alleged evidence seemed thin, most often 
devolving into gullibility, hoax, hallucination, misunderstanding 
of the natural world, hopes and fears disguised as evidence, and a 
71 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
craving for attention, fame and fortune. Too bad, I remember 
thinking. 
Since then, I've been lucky enough to be involved in sending 
spacecraft to other planets to look for life, and in listening for 
possible radio signals from alien civilizations, if any, on planets 
of distant stars. We've had a few tantalizing moments. But if 
the suspected signal isn't available for every grumpy sceptic to 
pick over, we cannot call it evidence of extraterrestrial life - no 
matter how appealing we find the notion. We'll just have to 
wait until, if such a time ever comes, better data are available. 
We've not yet found compelling evidence for life beyond the 
Earth. We're only at the very beginning of the search, though. 
New and better information might emerge, for all we know, 
tomorrow. 
I don't think anyone could be more interested than I am in 
whether we're being visited. It would save me so much time and 
effort to be able to study extraterrestrial life directly and nearby, 
rather than at best indirectly and at great distance. Even if the 
aliens are short, dour and sexually obsessed - if they're here, I 
want to know about them. 
How modest our expectations are about 'aliens', and how shoddy 
the standards of evidence that many of us are willing to accept, 
can be found in the saga of the crop circles. Originating in Britain 
and spreading throughout the world was something surpassing 
strange. 
Farmers or passers-by would discover circles (and, in later 
years, much more complex pictograms) impressed upon fields of 
wheat, oats, barley, and rapeseed. Beginning with simple circles 
in the middle 1970s, the phenomenon progressed year by year, 
until by the late 1980s and early 1990s the countryside, especially 
in southern England, was graced by immense geometrical figures, 
some the size of football fields, imprinted on cereal grain before 
the harvest - circles tangent to circles, or connected by axes, 
parallel lines drooping off, 'insectoids'. Some of the patterns 
showed a central circle surrounded by four symmetrically placed 
smaller circles - clearly, it was concluded, caused by a flying 
saucer and its four landing pods. 
72 


Aliens 
A hoax? Impossible, almost everyone said. There were hun-
dreds of cases. It was done sometimes in only an hour or two in 
the dead of night, and on such a large scale. No footprints of 
pranksters leading towards or away from the pictograms could be 
found. And besides, what possible motive could there be for a 
hoax? 
Many less conventional conjectures were offered. People with 
some scientific training examined sites, spun arguments, instituted 
whole journals devoted to the subject. Were the figures caused by 
strange whirlwinds called 'columnar vortices', or even stranger 
ones called 'ring vortices'? What about ball lightning? Japanese 
investigators tried to simulate, in the laboratory and on a small 
scale, the plasma physics they thought was working its way on 
far-off Wiltshire. 
But especially as the crop figures became more complex, 
meteorological or electrical explanations became more strained. 
Plainly it was due to UFOs, the aliens communicating to us in a 
geometrical language. Or perhaps it was the devil, or the long-
suffering Earth complaining about the depredations visited upon 
it by the hand of Man. New Age tourists came in droves. All-night 
vigils were undertaken by enthusiasts equipped with audio record-
ers and infrared vision scopes. Print and electronic media from all 
over the world tracked the intrepid cerealogists. Best-selling 
books on extraterrestrial crop distorters were purchased by a 
breathless and admiring public. True, no saucer was actually seen 
settling down on the wheat, no geometrical figure was filmed in 
the course of being generated. But dowsers authenticated their 
alien origin, and channellers made contact with the entities 
responsible. 'Orgone energy' was detected within the circles. 
Questions were asked in Parliament. The royal family called in 
for special consultation Lord Solly Zuckerman, former principal 
scientific adviser to the Ministry of Defence. Ghosts were said to 
be involved; also, the Knights Templar of Malta and other secret 
societies. Satanists were implicated. The Defence Ministry was 
covering the matter up. A few inept and inelegant circles were 
judged attempts by the military to throw the public off the track. 
The tabloid press had a field day. The Daily Mirror hired a farmer 
and his son to make five circles in hope of tempting a rival tabloid. 
73 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
the Daily Express, into reporting the story. The Express was, in 
this case at least, not taken in. 
'Cerealogical' organizations grew and splintered. Competing 
groups sent each other intimidating doggerel. Accusations were 
made of incompetence or worse. The number of crop 'circles' rose 
into the thousands. The phenomenon spread to the United States, 
Canada, Bulgaria, Hungary, Japan, the Netherlands. The picto-
grams - especially the more complex of them - began to be quoted 
increasingly in arguments for alien visitation. Strained connec-
tions were drawn to the 'Face' on Mars. One scientist of my 
acquaintance wrote to me that extremely sophisticated mathemat-
ics was hidden in these figures; they could only be the result of a 
superior intelligence. In fact, one matter on which almost all of 
the contending cerealogists agreed is that the later crop figures 
were much too complex and elegant to be due to mere human 
intervention, much less to some ragged and irresponsible hoaxers. 
Extraterrestrial intelligence was apparent at a glance . . . 
In 1991, Doug Bower and Dave Chorley, two blokes from 
Southampton, announced they had been making crop figures for 
fifteen years. They dreamed it up over stout one evening in their 
regular pub, The Percy Hobbes. They had been amused by UFO 
reports and thought it might be fun to spoof the UFO gullibles. At 
first they flattened the wheat with the heavy steel bar that Bower 
used as a security device on the back door of his picture framing 
shop. Later on they used planks and ropes. Their first efforts took 
only a few minutes. But, being inveterate pranksters as well as 
serious artists, the challenge began to grow on them. Gradually, 
they designed and executed more and more demanding figures. 
At first no one seemed to notice. There were no media reports. 
Their artforms were neglected by the tribe of UFOlogists. They 
were on the verge of abandoning crop circles to move on to some 
other, more emotionally rewarding hoax. 
Suddenly crop circles caught on. UFOlogists fell for it hook, 
line and sinker. Bower and Chorley were delighted - especially 
when scientists and others began to announce their considered 
judgement that no merely human intelligence could be responsi-
ble. 
Carefully they planned each nocturnal excursion, sometimes 
74 


Aliens 
following meticulous diagrams they had prepared in watercolours. 
They closely tracked their interpreters. When a local meteorolo-
gist deduced a kind of whirlwind because all of the crops were 
deflected downward in a clockwise circle, they confounded him by 
making a new figure with an exterior ring flattened counterclock-
wise. 
Soon other crop figures appeared in southern England and 
elsewhere. Copycat hoaxsters had appeared. Bower and Chorley 
carved out a responsive message in wheat: 'WEARENO-
TALONE'. Even this some took to be a genuine extraterrestrial 
message (although it would have been better had it read 
'YOUARENOTALONE'). Doug and Dave began signing their 
artworks with two Ds; even this was attributed to a mysterious 
alien purpose. Bower's nocturnal disappearances aroused the 
suspicions of his wife Ilene. Only with great difficulty - Ilene 
accompanying Dave and Doug one night, and then joining the 
credulous in admiring their handiwork next day - was she 
convinced that his absences were, in this sense, innocent. 
Eventually Bower and Chorley tired of the increasingly elabo-
rate prank. While in excellent physical condition, they were both 
in their sixties now and a little old for nocturnal commando 
operations in the fields of unknown and often unsympathetic 
farmers. They may have been annoyed at the fame and fortune 
accrued by those who merely photographed their art and 
announced aliens to be the artists. And they became worried that 
if they delayed much longer, no statement of theirs would be 
believed. 
So they confessed. They demonstrated to reporters how they 
made even the most elaborate insectoid patterns. You might think 
that never again would it be argued that a sustained hoax over 
many years is impossible, and never again would we hear that no 
one could possibly be motivated to deceive the gullible into 
thinking that aliens exist. But the media paid brief attention. 
Cerealogists urged them to go easy; after all, they were depriving 
many of the pleasure of imagining wondrous happenings. 
Since then, other crop circle hoaxers have kept at it, but mostly 
in a more desultory and less inspired manner. As always, the 
confession of the hoax is greatly overshadowed by the sustained 
75 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
initial excitement. Many have heard of the pictograms in cereal 
grains and their alleged UFO connection, but draw a blank when 
the names of Bower and Chorley or the very idea that the whole 
business may be a hoax are raised. An informative expose by the 
journalist Jim Schnabel (Round in Circles, 1994), from which 
much of my account is taken, is in print. Schnabel joined the 
cerealogists early and in the end made a few successful pictograms 
himself. (He prefers a garden roller to a wooden plank, and found 
that simply stomping grain with one's feet does an acceptable 
job.) But Schnabel's work, which one reviewer called 'the funniest 
book I've read in ages', had only modest success. Demons sell; 
hoaxers are boring and in bad taste. 
The tenets of scepticism do not require an advanced degree to 
master, as most successful used car buyers demonstrate. The 
whole idea of a democratic application of scepticism is that 
everyone should have the essential tools to effectively and con-
structively evaluate claims to knowledge. All science asks is to 
employ the same levels of scepticism we use in buying a used car 
or in judging the quality of analgesics or beer from their television 
commercials. 
But the tools of scepticism are generally unavailable to the 
citizens of our society. They're hardly ever mentioned in the 
schools, even in the presentation of science, its most ardent 
practitioner, although scepticism repeatedly sprouts spontane-
ously out of the disappointments of everyday life. Our politics, 
economics, advertising and religions (New Age and Old) are 
awash in credulity. Those who have something to sell, those who 
wish to influence public opinion, those in power, a sceptic might 
suggest, have a vested interest in discouraging scepticism. 
76 


Spoofing and Secrecy 
Trust a witness in all matters in which neither his 
self-interest, his passions, his prejudices, nor the love of the 
marvellous is strongly concerned. When they are involved, 
require corroborative evidence in exact proportion to the 
contravention of probability by the thing testified. 
Thomas Henry Huxley (1825-1895) 
W
hen the mother of celebrity abductee Travis Walton was 
informed that a UFO had zapped her son with a bolt of 
lightning and then carried him off into space, she replied incuri-
ously, 'Well, that's the way these things happen.' Is it? 
To agree that UFOs are in our skies is not committing to very 
much: 'UFO' is an abbreviation for 'Unidentified Flying Object'. 
It is a more inclusive term than 'flying saucer'. That there are 
things seen which the ordinary observer, or even an occasional 
expert, does not understand is inevitable. But why, if we see 
something we don't recognize, should we conclude it's a ship from 
the stars? A wide variety of more prosaic possibilities present 
themselves. 
After misapprehended natural events and hoaxes and psycho-
logical aberrations are removed from the data set, is there any 
residue of very credible but extremely bizarre cases, especially 
ones supported by physical evidence? Is there a 'signal' hiding in 
all that noise? In my view, no signal has been detected. There are 
77 
5 
