THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
President and chief spokesman, Grover Whalen - a former 
corporate executive, New York City police chief in a time of 
unprecedented police brutality, and public relations innovator. It 
was he who had envisioned the exhibit buildings as chiefly 
commercial, industrial, oriented to consumer products, and he 
who had convinced Stalin and Mussolini to build lavish national 
pavilions. (He later complained about how often he had been 
obliged to give the fascist salute.) The level of the exhibits, as one 
designer described it, was pitched to the mentality of a twelve-
year-old. 
However, as recounted by the historian Peter Kuznick of 
American University, a group of prominent scientists, including 
Harold Urey and Albert Einstein, advocated presenting science 
for its own sake, not just as the route to gadgets for sale; 
concentrating on the way of thinking and not just the products of 
science. They were convinced that broad popular understanding 
of science was the antidote to superstition and bigotry; that, as 
science popularizer Watson Davis put it, 'the scientific way is the 
democratic way'. One scientist even suggested that widespread 
public appreciation of the methods of science might work 'a final 
conquest of stupidity' - a worthy, but probably unrealizable, goal. 
As events transpired, almost no real science was tacked on to 
the Fair's exhibits, despite the scientists' protests and their appeals 
to high principles. And yet, some of the little that was added 
trickled down to me and helped to transform my childhood. The 
corporate and consumer focus remained central, though, and 
essentially nothing appeared about science as a way of thinking, 
much less as a bulwark of a free society. 
Exactly half a century later, in the closing years of the Soviet 
Union, Ann Druyan and I found ourselves at a dinner in 
Peredelkino, a village outside Moscow where Communist Party 
officials, retired generals and a few favoured intellectuals had 
their summer homes. The air was electric with the prospect of new 
freedoms - especially the right to speak your mind even if the 
government doesn't like what you're saying. The fabled revolu-
tion of rising expectations was in full flower. 
But, despite glasnost, there were widespread doubts. Would 
378 


Science and Witchcraft 
those in power really allow their own critics to be heard? Would 
freedom of speech, of assembly, of the press, of religion, really be 
permitted? Would people inexperienced with freedom be able to 
bear its burdens? 
Some of the Soviet citizens present at the dinner had fought for 
decades and against long odds for the freedoms that most Ameri-
cans take for granted; indeed, they had been inspired by the 
American experiment, a real-world demonstration that nations, 
even multicultural and multiethnic nations, could survive and 
prosper with these freedoms reasonably intact. They went so far 
as to raise the possibility that prosperity was due to freedom -
that, in an age of high technology and swift change, the two rise or 
fall together, that the openness of science and democracy, their 
willingness to be judged by experiment, were closely allied ways 
of thinking. 
There were many toasts, as there always are at dinners in that 
part of the world. The most memorable was given by a 
world-famous Soviet novelist. He stood up, raised his glass, 
looked us in the eye, and said, 'To the Americans. They have a 
little freedom.' He paused a beat, and then added: 'And they 
know how to keep it.' 
Do we? 
The ink was barely dry on the Bill of Rights before politicians 
found a way to subvert it, by cashing in on fear and patriotic 
hysteria. In 1798, the ruling Federalist Party knew that the button 
to push was ethnic and cultural prejudice. Exploiting tensions 
between France and the US, and a widespread fear that French 
and Irish immigrants were somehow intrinsically unfit to be 
Americans, the Federalists passed a set of laws that have come to 
be known as the Alien and Sedition Acts. 
One law upped the residency requirement for citizenship 
from five to fourteen years. (Citizens of French and Irish origin 
usually 
voted 
for 
the 
opposition, 
Thomas 
Jefferson's 
Democratic-Republican Party.) The Alien Act gave President 
John Adams the power to deport any foreigner who aroused his 
suspicions. Making the President nervous, said a member of 
Congress, 'is the new crime'. Jefferson believed the Alien Act 
379 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
had been framed particularly to expel C.F. Volney,* the French 
historian and philosopher; Pierre Samuel du Pont de Nemours, 
patriarch of the famous chemical family; and the British 
scientist Joseph Priestley, the discoverer of oxygen and an 
intellectual antecedent of James Clerk Maxwell. In Jefferson's 
view, these were just the sort of people America needed. 
The Sedition Act made it unlawful to publish 'false or malicious' 
criticism of the government or to inspire opposition to any of its 
acts. Some two dozen arrests were made, ten people were 
convicted, and many more were censored or intimidated into 
silence. The act attempted, Jefferson said, 'to crush all political 
opposition by making criticism of Federalist officials or policies a 
crime'. 
As soon as Jefferson was elected, indeed in the first week of his 
Presidency in 1801, he began pardoning every victim of the 
Sedition Act because, he said, it was as contrary to the spirit of 
American freedoms as if Congress had ordered us all to fall down 
and worship a golden calf. By 1802, none of the Alien and 
Sedition Acts remained on the books. 
From across two centuries, it's hard to recapture the frenzied 
mood that made the French and the 'wild Irish' seem so grave a 
threat that we were willing to surrender our most precious 
freedoms. Giving credit for French and Irish cultural triumphs, 
advocating equal rights for them, was in effect decried in 
conservative circles as sentimental - unrealistic political cor-
rectness. But that's how it always works. It always seems an 
aberration later. But by then we're in the grip of the next 
hysteria. 
Those who seek power at any price detect a societal weakness, a 
fear that they can ride into office. It could be ethnic differences, as 
* A typical passage from Volney's 1791 book Ruins: 
You dispute, you quarrel, you fight for that which is uncertain, that of 
which you doubt. O men! Is this not folly? . . . We must trace a line of 
distinction between those [subjects] that are capable of verification, and 
those that are not, and separate by an inviolable barrier the world of 
fantastical beings from the world of realities; that is to say, all civil effect 
must be taken away from theological and religious opinions. 
380 


Science and Witchcraft 
it was then, perhaps different amounts of melanin in the skin; 
different philosophies or religions; or maybe it's drug use, violent 
crime, economic crisis, school prayer, or 'desecrating' (literally, 
making unholy) the flag. 
Whatever the problem, the quick fix is to shave a little freedom 
off the Bill of Rights. Yes, in 1942, Japanese-Americans were 
protected by the Bill of Rights, but we locked them up anyway -
after all, there was a war on. Yes, there are Constitutional 
prohibitions against unreasonable search and seizure, but we have 
a war on drugs and violent crime is racing out of control. Yes, 
there's freedom of speech, but we don't want foreign authors 
here, spouting alien ideologies, do we? The pretexts change from 
year to year, but the result remains the same: concentrating more 
power in fewer hands and suppressing diversity of opinion - even 
though experience plainly shows the danger of such a course of 
action. 
If we do not know what we're capable of, we cannot appreciate 
measures taken to protect us from ourselves. I discussed the 
European witch mania in the alien abduction context; I hope the 
reader will forgive me for returning to it in its political context. It 
is an aperture to human self-knowledge. If we focus on what was 
considered acceptable evidence and a fair trial by the religious and 
secular authorities in the fifteenth- to seventeenth-century witch 
hunts, many of the novel and peculiar features of the eighteenth-
century US Constitution and Bill of Rights become clear: includ-
ing trial by jury, prohibitions against self-incrimination and 
against cruel and unusual punishment, freedom of speech and the 
press, due process, the balance of powers and the separation of 
Church and State. 
Friedrich von Spee (pronounced 'Shpay') was a Jesuit priest 
who had the misfortune to hear the confessions of those accused 
of witchcraft in the German city of Wurzburg (see Chapter 7). In 
1631, he published Cautio Criminalis (Precautions for Prosecu-
tors), which exposed the essence of this Church/State terrorism 
against the innocent. Before he was punished he died of the 
plague - as a parish priest serving the afflicted. Here is an excerpt 
from his whistle-blowing book: 
381 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
1. Incredibly among us Germans, and especially (I am 
ashamed to say) among Catholics, are popular supersti-
tions, envy, calumnies, backbiting, insinuations, and the 
like, which, being neither punished nor refuted, stir up 
suspicion of witchcraft. No longer God or nature, but 
witches are responsible for everything. 
2. Hence everybody sets up a clamour that the magistrates 
investigate the witches - whom only popular gossip has 
made so numerous. 
3. Princes, therefore, bid their judges and counsellors bring 
proceedings against the witches. 
4. The judges hardly know where to start, since they have 
no evidence [indicia] or proof. 
5. Meanwhile, the people call this delay suspicious; and the 
princes are persuaded by some informer or another to 
this effect. 
6. In Germany, to offend these princes is a serious offence; 
even clergymen approve whatever pleases them, not 
caring by whom these princes (however well-intentioned) 
have been instigated. 
7. At last, therefore, the judges yield to their wishes and 
contrive to begin the trials. 
8. Other judges who still delay, afraid to get involved in this 
ticklish matter, are sent a special investigator. In this 
field of investigation, whatever inexperience or arro-
gance he brings to the job is held zeal for justice. His zeal 
for justice is also whetted by hopes of profit, especially 
with a poor and greedy agent with a large family, when 
he receives as stipend so many dollars per head for each 
witch burned, besides the incidental fees and perquisites 
which investigating agents are allowed to extort at will 
from those they summon. 
9. If a madman's ravings or some malicious and idle rumour 
(for no proof of the scandal is ever needed) points to 
some helpless old woman, she is the first to suffer. 
10. Yet to avoid the appearance that she is indicted solely on 
the basis of rumour, without other proofs, a certain 
presumption of guilt is obtained by posing the following 
382 


Science and Witchcraft 
dilemma: either she has led an evil and improper life, or 
she has led a good and proper one. If an evil one, then 
she should be guilty. On the other hand, if she has led a 
good life, this is just as damning; for witches dissemble 
and try to appear especially virtuous. 
11. Therefore the old woman is put in prison. A new proof is 
found through a second dilemma: she is afraid or not 
afraid. If she is (hearing of the horrible tortures used 
against witches), this is sure proof; for her conscience 
accuses her. If she does not show fear (trusting in her 
innocence), this too is a proof; for witches characteristi-
cally pretend innocence and wear a bold front. 
12. Lest these should be the only proofs, the investigator has 
his snoopers, often depraved and infamous, ferret out all 
her past life. This, of course, cannot be done without 
turning up some saying or doing of hers which men so 
disposed can easily twist or distort into evidence of 
witchcraft. 
13. Any who have borne her ill now have ample opportunity 
to bring against her whatever accusations they please; 
and everyone says that the evidence is strong against her. 
14. And so she is hurried to the torture, unless, as often 
happens, she was tortured on the very day of her arrest. 
15. In these trials nobody is allowed a lawyer or any means of 
fair defence, for witchcraft is reckoned an exceptional 
crime [of such enormity that all rules of legal procedure 
may be suspended], and whoever ventures to defend the 
prisoner falls himself under suspicion of witchcraft - as 
well as those who dare to utter a protest in these cases 
and to urge the judges to exercise prudence, for they are 
forthwith labelled supporters of witchcraft. Thus every-
body keeps quiet for fear. 
16. So that it may seem that the woman has an opportunity to 
defend herself, she is brought into court and the indica-
tions of her guilt are read and examined - if it can be 
called an examination. 
17. Even though she denies these charges and satisfactorily 
answers every accusation, no attention is paid and her 
383 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
replies are not even recorded; all the indictments retain 
their force and validity, however perfect her answers to 
them. She is ordered back into prison, there to consider 
more carefully whether she will persist in obstinacy - for, 
since she has already denied her guilt, she is obstinate. 
18. Next day she is brought out again, and hears a decree of 
torture - just as if she had never refuted the charges. 
19. Before torture, however, she is searched for amulets: her 
entire body is shaved, and even those privy parts indicat-
ing the female sex are wantonly examined. 
20. What is so shocking about this? Priests are treated the 
same way. 
21. When the woman has been shaved and searched, she is 
tortured to make her confess the truth - that is, to declare 
what they want, for naturally anything else will not and 
cannot be the truth. 
22. They start with the first degree, i.e., the less severe 
torture. Although exceedingly severe, it is light com-
pared to those tortures which follow. Wherefore if she 
confesses, they say the woman has confessed without 
torture! 
23. Now, what prince can doubt her guilt when he is told she 
has confessed voluntarily, without torture? 
24. She is therefore put to death without scruple. But she 
would have been executed even if she had not confessed; 
for when once the torture has begun, the die is already 
cast; she cannot escape, she has perforce to die. 
25. The result is the same whether she confesses or not. If 
she confesses, her guilt is clear: she is executed. All 
recantation is in vain. If she does not confess, the torture 
is repeated - twice, thrice, four times. In exceptional 
crimes, the torture is not limited in duration, severity, or 
frequency. 
26. If, during the torture, the old woman contorts her 
features with pain, they say she is laughing; if she loses 
consciousness, she is sleeping or has bewitched herself 
into taciturnity. And if she is taciturn, she deserves to be 
burned alive, as lately has been done to some who, 
384 


Science and Witchcraft 
though several times tortured, would not say what the 
investigators wanted. 
27. And even confessors and clergymen agree that she died 
obstinate and impenitent; that she would not be con-
verted or desert her incubus, but kept faith with him. 
28. If, however, she dies under so much torture, they say the 
devil broke her neck. 
29. Wherefore the corpse is buried underneath the gallows. 
30. On the other hand, if she does not die under torture, and 
if some exceptionally scrupulous judge hesitates to tor-
ture her further without fresh proofs or to burn her 
without her confession, she is kept in prison and more 
harshly chained, there to rot until she yields, even if it 
take a whole year. 
31. She can never clear herself. The investigating committee 
would feel disgraced if it acquitted a woman; once arrested 
and in chains, she has to be guilty, by fair means or foul. 
32. Meanwhile, ignorant and headstrong priests harass the 
wretched creature so that, whether truly or not, she will 
confess herself guilty; unless she does so, they say, she 
cannot be saved or partake of the sacraments. 
33. More understanding or learned priests cannot visit her in 
prison lest they counsel her or inform the princes what goes 
on. Nothing is more dreaded than that something be 
brought to light to prove the innocence of the accused. 
Persons who try to do so are labelled troublemakers. 
34. While she is kept in prison and tortured, the judges invent 
clever devices to build up new proofs of guilt to convict her 
to her face, so that, when reviewing the trial, some univer-
sity faculty can confirm her burning alive. 
35. Some judges, to appear ultrascrupulous, have the woman 
exorcized, transferred elsewhere, and tortured all over 
again, to break her taciturnity; if she maintains silence, then 
at last they can burn her. Now, in Heaven's name, I would 
like to know, since she who confesses and she who does not 
both perish alike, how can anybody, no matter how inno-
cent, escape? O unhappy woman, why have you rashly 
hoped? Why did you not, on first entering prison, admit 
385 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
whatever they wanted? Why, foolish and crazy woman, did 
you wish to die so many times when you might have died 
but once? Follow my counsel, and, before undergoing all 
these pains, say you are guilty and die. You will not escape, 
for this were a catastrophic disgrace to the zeal of Germany. 
36. When, under stress of pain, the witch has confessed, her 
plight is indescribable. Not only cannot she escape herself, 
but she is also compelled to accuse others whom she does 
not know, whose names are frequently put into her mouth 
by the investigators or suggested by the executioner, or of 
whom she has heard as suspected or accused. These in turn 
are forced to accuse others, and these still others, so it goes 
on: who can help seeing that it must go on and on? 
37. The judges must either suspend these trials (and so impute 
their validity) or else burn their own folk, themselves, and 
everybody else; for all sooner or later are falsely accused 
and, if tortured, all are proved guilty. 
38. Thus eventually those who at first clamoured most loudly to 
feed the flames are themselves involved, for they rashly 
failed to see that their turn too would come. Thus Heaven 
justly punishes those who with their pestilent tongues 
created so many witches and sent so many innocent to the 
stake . . . 
Von Spee is not explicit about the sickening methods of torture 
employed. Here is an excerpt from an invaluable compilation, The 
Encyclopedia of Witchcraft and Demonology, by Rossell Hope 
Robbins (1959): 
One might glance at some of the special tortures at Bamberg, 
for example, such as the forcible feeding of the accused on 
herrings cooked in salt, followed by denial of water - a 
sophisticated method which went side by side with immersion 
of the accused in baths of scalding water to which lime had 
been added. Other ways with witches included the wooden 
horse, various kinds of racks, the heated iron chair, leg vises 
[Spanish boots], and large boots of leather or metal into 
which (with the feet in them, of course) was poured boiling 
386 


Science and Witchcraft 
water or molten lead. In the water torture, the question de 
l'eau, water was poured down the throat of the accused, along 
with a soft cloth to cause choking. The cloth was pulled out 
quickly so that the entrails would be torn. The thumbscrews 
[gresillons] were a vise designed to compress the thumbs or 
the big toes to the root of the nails, so that the crushing of the 
digit would cause excruciating pain. 
In addition, and more routinely applied, were the strappado and 
squassation and still more ghastly tortures that I will avoid 
describing. After torture, and with the instruments of torture in 
plain view, the victim was asked to sign a statement. This was then 
described as a 'free confession', voluntarily admitted to. 
At great personal risk, von Spee protested the witch mania. So 
did a few others, mainly Catholic and Protestant clergy who had 
witnessed these crimes at first hand - including Gianfrancesco 
Ponzinibio in Italy, Cornelius Loos in Germany and Reginald Scot 
in Britain in the sixteenth century; as well as Johann Mayfurth 
('Listen, you money-hungry judges and bloodthirsty prosecutors, 
the apparitions of the Devil are all lies') in Germany and Alonzo 
Salazar de Frias in Spain in the seventeenth century. Along with 
von Spee and the Quakers generally, they are heroes of our 
species. Why are they not better known? 
In A Candle in the Dark (1656), Thomas Ady addressed a key 
question: 
Some again will object and say, If Witches cannot kill, and do 
many strange things by Witchcraft, why have many confessed 
that they have done such Murthers, and other strange mat-
ters, whereof they have been accused? 
To this I answer, If Adam and Eve in their innocency were 
so easily overcome, and tempted to sin, how much more may 
poor Creatures now after the Fall, by persuasions, promises, 
and threatenings, by keeping from sleep, and continual 
torture, be brought to confess that which is false and impossi-
ble, and contrary to the faith of a Christian to believe? 
It was not until the eighteenth century that the possibility of 
387 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
hallucination as a component in the persecution of witches was 
seriously entertained; Bishop Francis Hutchinson, in his Historical 
Essay Concerning Witchcraft (1718), wrote 
Many a man hath verily believed he hath seen a spirit 
externally before him, when it hath been only an internal 
image dancing in his own brain. 
Because of the courage of these opponents of the witch mania, its 
extension to the privileged classes, the danger it posed to the growing 
institution of capitalism, and especially the spread of the ideas of the 
European Enlightenment, witch burnings eventually disappeared. 
The last execution for witchcraft in Holland, cradle of the Enlighten-
ment, was in 1610; in England, 1684; America, 1692; France, 1745; 
Germany, 1775; and Poland, 1793. In Italy, the Inquisition was 
condemning people to death until the end of the eighteenth century, 
and inquisitorial torture was not abolished in the Catholic Church 
until 1816. The last bastion of support for the reality of witchcraft 
and the necessity of punishment has been the Christian churches. 
The witch mania is shameful. How could we do it? How could we 
be so ignorant about ourselves and our weaknesses? How could it 
have happened in the most 'advanced', the most 'civilized' nations 
then on Earth? Why was it resolutely supported by conservatives, 
monarchists and religious fundamentalists? Why opposed by liberals, 
Quakers and followers of the Enlightenment? If we're absolutely 
sure that our beliefs are right, and those of others wrong; that we are 
motivated by good, and others by evil; that the King of the Universe 
speaks to us, and not to adherents of very different faiths; that it is 
wicked to challenge conventional doctrines or to ask searching 
questions; that our main job is to believe and obey - then the witch 
mania will recur in its infinite variations down to the time of the last 
man. Note Friedrich von Spee's very first point, and the implication 
that improved public understanding of superstition and scepticism 
might have helped to short-circuit the whole train of causality. If we 
fail to understand how it worked in the last round, we will not 
recognize it as it emerges in the next. 
'It is the absolute right of the state to supervise the formation of 
388 


Science and Witchcraft 
public opinion,' said Josef Goebbels, the Nazi propaganda minis-
ter. In George Orwell's novel 1984, the 'Big Brother' state 
employs an army of bureaucrats whose only job is to alter the 
records of the past so they conform to the interests of those 
currently in power. 1984 was not just an engaging political fantasy; 
it was based on the Stalinist Soviet Union, where the re-writing of 
history was institutionalized. Soon after Stalin took power, pic-
tures of his rival Leon Trotsky - a monumental figure in the 1905 
and 1917 revolutions - began to disappear. Heroic and wholly 
anhistoric paintings of Stalin and Lenin together directing the 
Bolshevik Revolution took their place, with Trotsky, the founder 
of the Red Army, nowhere in evidence. These images became 
icons of the state. You could see them in every office building, on 
outdoor advertising signs sometimes ten storeys high, in muse-
ums, on postage stamps. 
New generations grew up believing that was their history. Older 
generations began to feel that they remembered something of the 
sort, a kind of political false-memory syndrome. Those who made 
the accommodation between their real memories and what the 
leadership wished them to believe exercised what Orwell 
described as 'doublethink'. Those who did not, those old Bolshe-
viks who could recall the peripheral role of Stalin in the Revolu-
tion and the central role of Trotsky, were denounced as traitors or 
unreconstructed bourgeoisie or 'Trotskyites' or 'Trotsky-fascists', 
and were imprisoned, tortured, made to confess their treason in 
public, and then executed. It is possible - given absolute control 
over the media and the police - to rewrite the memories of 
hundreds of millions of people, if you have a generation to 
accomplish it in. Almost always, this is done to improve the hold 
that the powerful have on power, or to serve the narcissism or 
megalomania or paranoia of national leaders. It throws a monkey-
wrench into the error-correcting machinery. It works to erase 
public memory of profound political mistakes, and thus to guaran-
tee their eventual repetition. 
In our time, with total fabrication of realistic stills, motion 
pictures, and videotapes technologically within reach, with televi-
sion in every home, and with critical thinking in decline, restruc-
turing societal memories even without much attention from the 
389 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
secret police seems possible. What I'm imagining here is not that 
each of us has a budget of memories implanted in special 
therapeutic sessions by state-appointed psychiatrists, but rather 
that small numbers of people will have so much control over new 
stories, history books, and deeply affecting images as to work 
major changes in collective attitudes. 
We saw a pale echo of what is now possible in 1990-91, when 
Saddam Hussein, the autocrat of Iraq, made a sudden transition in 
the American consciousness from an obscure near-ally - granted 
commodities, high technology, weaponry, and even satellite intel-
ligence data - to a slavering monster menacing the world. I am not 
myself an admirer of Mr Hussein, but it was striking how quickly 
he could be brought from someone almost no American had heard 
of into the incarnation of evil. These days the apparatus for 
generating indignation is busy elsewhere. How confident are we 
that the power to drive and determine public opinion will always 
reside in responsible hands? 
Another contemporary example is the 'war' on drugs where the 
government and munificently funded civic groups systematically 
distort and even invent scientific evidence of adverse effects 
(especially of marijuana), and in which no public official is 
permitted even to raise the topic for open discussion. 
But it's hard to keep potent historical truths bottled up forever. 
New data repositories are uncovered. New, less ideological, genera-
tions of historians grow up. In the late 1980s and before, Ann 
Druyan and I would routinely smuggle copies of Trotsky's History of 
the Russian Revolution into the USSR, so our colleagues could know 
a little about their own political beginnings. By the fiftieth anniver-
sary of the murder of Trotsky (Stalin's assassin had cracked Trotsky's 
head open with a hammer), Izvestia could extol Trotsky as 'a great 
and irreproachable* revolutionary', and a German Communist pub-
lication went so far as to describe him as 
fight[ing] for all of us who love human civilization, for whom 
this civilization is our nationality. His murderer . . . tried, in 
* Suggesting that the authorities have learned nothing from their history, except 
substituting one historical figure for another on the list of Irreproachables. 
390 


Science and Witchcraft 
killing him, to kill this civilization . . . [This] was a man who 
had in his head the most valuable and best-organized brain 
that was ever crushed by a hammer. 
Trends working at least marginally towards the implantation of a 
very narrow range of attitudes, memories and opinions include 
control of major television networks and newspapers by a small 
number of similarly motivated powerful corporations and indi-
viduals, the disappearance of competitive daily newspapers in 
many cities, the replacement of substantive debate by sleaze in 
political campaigns, and episodic erosion of the principle of the 
separation of powers. It is estimated (by the American media 
expert Ben Bagditrian) that fewer than two dozen corporations 
control more than half of the global business in daily newspapers, 
magazines, television, books and movies! The proliferation of 
cable television channels, cheap long-distance telephone calls, fax 
machines, computer bulletin boards and networks, inexpensive 
computer self-publishing and surviving instances of the traditional 
liberal arts university curriculum are trends that might work in the 
opposite direction. 
It's hard to tell how it's going to turn out. 
The business of scepticism is to be dangerous. Scepticism 
challenges established institutions. If we teach everybody, includ-
ing, say, high school students, habits of sceptical thought, they will 
probably not restrict their scepticism to UFOs, aspirin commer-
cials and 35,000-year-old channellees. Maybe they'll start asking 
awkward questions about economic, or social, or political, or 
religious institutions. Perhaps they'll challenge the opinions of 
those in power. Then where would we be? 
Ethnocentrism, xenophobia and nationalism are these days rife in 
many parts of the world. Government repression of unpopular 
views is still widespread. False or misleading memories are 
inculcated. For the defenders of such attitudes, science is disturb-
ing. It claims access to truths that are largely independent of 
ethnic or cultural biases. By its very nature, science transcends 
national boundaries. Put scientists working in the same field of 
study together in a room and even if they share no common 
391 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
spoken language, they will find a way to communicate. Science 
itself is a transnational language. Scientists are naturally cosmo-
politan in attitude and are more likely to see through efforts to 
divide the human family into many small and warring factions. 
'There is no national science,' said the Russian playwright Anton 
Chekhov, 'just as there is no national multiplication table.' 
(Likewise, for many, there is no such thing as a national religion, 
although the religion of nationalism has millions of adherents.) 
In disproportionate numbers, scientists are found in the ranks 
of social critics (or, less charitably, 'dissidents'), challenging the 
policies and myths of their own nations. The heroic names of the 
physicists Andrei Sakharov* in the former USSR, Albert Einstein 
and Leo Szilard in the United States, and Fang Li-zhu in China 
spring readily enough to mind, the first and last risking their lives. 
Especially in the aftermath of the invention of nuclear weapons, 
scientists have been portrayed as ethical cretins. This is an 
injustice, considering all those who, sometimes at considerable 
personal peril, have spoken out against their own countries' 
misapplications of science and technology. 
For example, the chemist Linus Pauling (1901-94) was, more 
than any other person, responsible for the Limited Test Ban 
Treaty of 1963, which halted above-ground explosions of nuclear 
weapons by the United States, the Soviet Union and the United 
Kingdom. He mounted a blistering campaign of moral outrage 
and scientific data, made more credible by the fact that he was a 
Nobel laureate. In the American press, he was generally vilified 
for his troubles, and in the 1950s the State Department cancelled 
his passport because he had been insufficiently anti-communist. 
His Nobel Prize was awarded for the application of quantum 
mechanical insights - resonances, and what is called hybridization 
* As a much-decorated 'Hero' of the Soviet Union, and privy to its nuclear 
secrets, Sakharov in the Cold War year 1968 boldly wrote - in a book published 
in the West and widely distributed in samizdat in the USSR - 'Freedom of 
thought is the only guarantee against an infection of peoples by the mass myths, 
which, in the hands of treacherous hypocrites and demogogues, can be 
transformed into bloody dictatorships.' He was thinking of both East and West. 
I would add that free thought is a necessary, but not a sufficient, condition for 
democracy. 
392 


Science and Witchcraft 
of orbitals - to explain the nature of the chemical bond that joins 
atoms together into molecules. These ideas are now the bread and 
butter of modern chemistry. But in the Soviet Union, Pauling's 
work on structural chemistry was denounced as incompatible with 
dialectical materialism and declared off-limits to Soviet chemists. 
Undaunted by this criticism East and West - indeed, not even 
slowed down - he went on to do monumental work on how 
anaesthetics work, identified the cause of sickle cell anaemia (a 
single nucleotide substitution in DNA), and showed how the 
evolutionary history of life might be read by comparing the DNAs 
of various organisms. He was hot on the trail of the structure of 
DNA; Watson and Crick were consciously rushing to get there 
before Pauling. The verdict on his assessment of Vitamin C is 
apparently still out. 'That man is a real genius' was Albert 
Einstein's assessment. 
In all this time he continued to work for peace and amity. When 
Ann and I once asked Pauling about the roots of his dedication to 
social issues, he gave a memorable reply: 'I did it to be worthy of 
the respect of my wife,' Helen Ava Pauling. He won a second 
Nobel Prize, this one in peace, for his work on the nuclear test 
ban, becoming the only person in history to win two unshared 
Nobel Prizes. 
There were some who saw Pauling as a troublemaker. Those 
unhappy about social change may be tempted to view science itself 
with suspicion. Technology is safe, they tend to think, readily 
guided and controlled by industry and government. But pure 
science, science for its own sake, science as curiosity, science that 
might lead anywhere and challenge anything, that's another story. 
Certain areas of pure science are the unique pathway to future 
technologies - true enough - but the attitudes of science, if 
applied broadly, can be perceived as dangerous. Through salaries, 
social pressures, and the distribution of prestige and awards, 
societies try to herd scientists into some reasonably safe middle 
ground - between too little long-term technological progress and 
too much short-term social criticism. 
Unlike Pauling, many scientists consider their job to be science, 
narrowly defined, and believe that engaging in politics or social 
criticism is not just a distraction from but antithetical to the 
393 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
scientific life. As mentioned earlier, during the Manhattan 
Project, the successful World War Two US effort to build nuclear 
weapons before the Nazis did, certain participating scientists 
began to have reservations, the more so when it became clear how 
immensely powerful these weapons were. Some, such as Leo 
Szilard, James Franck, Harold Urey and Robert R. Wilson, tried 
to call the attention of political leaders and the public (especially 
after the Nazis were defeated) to the dangers of the forthcoming 
arms race, which they foresaw very well, with the Soviet Union. 
Others argued that policy matters were outside their jurisdiction. 
'I was put on Earth to make certain discoveries,' said Enrico 
Fermi, 'and what the political leaders do with them is not my 
business.' But even so, Fermi was so appalled by the dangers of 
the thermonuclear weapon Edward Teller was advocating that he 
co-authored a famous document urging the United States not to 
build it, calling it 'evil'. 
Jeremy Stone, the president of the Federation of American 
Scientists, has described Teller - whose efforts to justify thermo-
nuclear weapons I described in a previous chapter - in these 
words: 
Edward Teller . . . insisted, at first for personal intellectual 
reasons and later for geopolitical reasons, that a hydrogen 
bomb be built. Using tactics of exaggeration and even smear, 
he successfully manipulated the policy-making process for 
five decades, denouncing all manner of arms control meas-
ures and promoting arms-race-escalating programs of many 
kinds. 
The Soviet Union, hearing of his H-bomb project, built its 
own H-bomb. As a direct consequence of the unusual person-
ality of this particular individual and of the power of the 
H-bomb, the world may have risked a level of annihilation 
that might not otherwise have transpired, or might have come 
later and under better political controls. 
If so, no scientist has ever had more influence on the 
risks that humanity has run than Edward Teller, and 
Teller's general behavior throughout the arms race was 
reprehensible . . . 
394 


Science and Witchcraft 
Edward Teller's fixation on the H-bomb may have led him 
to do more to imperil life on this planet than any other 
individual in our species . . . 
Compared to Teller, the leaders of Western atomic science 
were frequently babes in the political woods - their leader-
ship having been determined by their professional skills 
rather than by, in this case, their political skills. 
My purpose here is not to castigate a scientist for succumbing to 
very human passions, but to reiterate that new imperative: the 
unprecedented powers that science now makes available must be 
accompanied by unprecedented levels of ethical focus and concern 
by the scientific community, as well as the most broadly based 
public education into the importance of science and democracy. 
395 


25 
Real Patriots Ask Questions* 
It is not the function of our government to keep the citizen 
from falling into error; it is the function of the citizen to 
keep the government from falling into error. 
US Supreme Court 
Justice Robert H. Jackson, 1950 
I
t is a fact of life on our beleaguered little planet that widespread 
torture, famine and governmental criminal irresponsibility are 
much more likely to be found in tyrannical than in democratic 
governments. Why? Because the rulers of the former are much 
less likely to be thrown out of office for their misdeeds than the 
rulers of the latter. This is error-correcting machinery in politics. 
The methods of science, with all its imperfections, can be used 
to improve social, political and economic systems, and this is, I 
think, true no matter what criterion of improvement is adopted. 
How is this possible if science is based on experiment? Humans 
are not electrons or laboratory rats. But every act of Congress, 
every Supreme Court decision, every Presidential National Secu-
rity Directive, every change in the Prime Rate is an experiment. 
Every shift in economic policy, every increase or decrease in 
funding for Head Start, every toughening of criminal sentences is 
an experiment. Exchanging needles, making condoms freely 
* Written with Ann Druyan. 
396 
