Preface 
My Teachers 
I
t was a blustery fall day in 1939. In the streets outside the 
apartment building, fallen leaves were swirling in little whirl-
winds, each with a life of its own. It was good to be inside and 
warm and safe, with my mother preparing dinner in the next 
room. In our apartment there were no older kids who picked on 
you for no reason. Just the week before, I had been in a fight - I 
can't remember, after all these years, who it was with; maybe it 
was Snoony Agata from the third floor - and, after a wild swing, I 
found I had put my fist through the plate glass window of 
Schechter's drug store. 
Mr Schechter was solicitous: 'It's all right, I'm insured,' he said 
as he put some unbelievably painful antiseptic on my wrist. My 
mother took me to the doctor whose office was on the ground 
floor of our building. With a pair of tweezers, he pulled out a 
fragment of glass. Using needle and thread, he sewed two stitches. 
'Two stitches!' my father had repeated later that night. He knew 
about stitches, because he was a cutter in the garment industry; his 
job was to use a very scary power saw to cut out patterns - backs, 
say, or sleeves for ladies' coats and suits - from an enormous stack 
of cloth. Then the patterns were conveyed to endless rows of 
women sitting at sewing machines. He was pleased I had gotten 
angry enough to overcome a natural timidity. 
Sometimes it was good to fight back. I hadn't planned to do 
anything violent. It just happened. One moment Snoony was 
1 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
pushing me and the next moment my fist was through Mr 
Schechter's window. I had injured my wrist, generated an unex-
pected medical expense, broken a plate glass window, and no one 
was mad at me. As for Snoony, he was more friendly than ever. 
I puzzled over what the lesson was. But it was much more 
pleasant to work it out up here in the warmth of the apartment, 
gazing out through the living-room window into Lower New York 
Bay, than to risk some new misadventure on the streets below. 
As she often did, my mother had changed her clothes and made 
up her face in anticipation of my father's arrival. We talked about 
my fight with Snoony. The Sun was almost setting and together we 
looked out across the choppy waters. 
'There are people fighting out there, killing each other,' she 
said, waving vaguely across the Atlantic. I peered intently. 
'I know,' I replied. 'I can see them.' 
'No, you can't,' she replied, sceptically, almost severely, before 
returning to the kitchen. 'They're too far away.' 
How could she know whether I could see them or not? I 
wondered. Squinting, I had thought I'd made out a thin strip of 
land at the horizon on which tiny figures were pushing and shoving 
and duelling with swords as they did in my comic books. But maybe 
she was right. Maybe it had just been my imagination, a little like 
the midnight monsters that still, on occasion, awakened me from a 
deep sleep, my pyjamas drenched in sweat, my heart pounding. 
How can you tell when someone is only imagining? I gazed out 
across the grey waters until night fell and I was called to wash my 
hands for dinner. When he came home, my father swooped me up 
in his arms. I could feel the cold of the outside world against his 
one-day growth of beard. 
On a Sunday in that same year, my father had patiently explained 
to me about zero as a placeholder in arithmetic, about the 
wicked-sounding names of big numbers, and about how there's no 
biggest number ('You can always add one,' he pointed out). 
Suddenly, I was seized by a childish compulsion to write in 
sequence all the integers from 1 to 1,000. We had no pads of 
paper, but my father offered up the stack of grey cardboards he 
had been saving from when his shirts were sent to the laundry. I 
2 


My Teachers 
started the project eagerly, but was surprised at how slowly it 
went. When I had gotten no farther than the low hundreds, my 
mother announced that it was time for me to take my bath. I was 
disconsolate. I had to get a thousand. A mediator his whole life, 
my father intervened: if I would cheerfully submit to the bath, he 
would continue the sequence. I was overjoyed. By the time I 
emerged, he was approaching 900, and I was able to reach 1,000 
only a little past my ordinary bedtime. The magnitude of large 
numbers has never ceased to impress me. 
Also in 1939 my parents took me to the New York World's Fair. 
There, I was offered a vision of a perfect future made possible by 
science and high technology. A time capsule was buried, packed 
with artefacts of our time for the benefit of those in the far future -
who, astonishingly, might not know much about the people of 
1939. The 'World of Tomorrow' would be sleek, clean, stream-
lined and, as far as I could tell, without a trace of poor people. 
'See sound' one exhibit bewilderingly commanded. And sure 
enough, when the tuning fork was struck by the little hammer, a 
beautiful sine wave marched across the oscilloscope screen. 'Hear 
light' another poster exhorted. And sure enough, when the 
flashlight shone on the photocell, I could hear something like the 
static on our Motorola radio set when the dial was between 
stations. Plainly the world held wonders of a kind I had never 
guessed. How could a tone become a picture and light become a 
noise? 
My parents were not scientists. They knew almost nothing 
about science. But in introducing me simultaneously to scepticism 
and to wonder, they taught me the two uneasily cohabiting modes 
of thought that are central to the scientific method. They were 
only one step out of poverty. But when I announced that I wanted 
to be an astronomer, I received unqualified support - even if they 
(as I) had only the most rudimentary idea of what an astronomer 
does. They never suggested that, all things considered, it might be 
better to be a doctor or a lawyer. 
I wish I could tell you about inspirational teachers in science 
from my elementary or junior high or high school days. But as I 
think back on it, there were none. There was rote memorization 
about the Periodic Table of the Elements, levers and inclined 
3 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
planes, green plant photosynthesis, and the difference between 
anthracite and bituminous coal. But there was no soaring sense of 
wonder, no hint of an evolutionary perspective, and nothing about 
mistaken ideas that everybody had once believed. In high school 
laboratory courses, there was an answer we were supposed to get. 
We were marked off if we didn't get it. There was no encourage-
ment to pursue our own interests or hunches or conceptual 
mistakes. In the backs of textbooks there was material you could 
tell was interesting. The school year would always end before we 
got to it. You could find wonderful books on astronomy, say, in 
the libraries, but not in the classroom. Long division was taught as 
a set of rules from a cookbook, with no explanation of how this 
particular sequence of short divisions, multiplications and subtrac-
tions got you the right answer. In high school, extracting square 
roots was offered reverentially, as if it were a method once handed 
down from Mt Sinai. It was our job merely to remember what we 
had been commanded. Get the right answer, and never mind that 
you don't understand what you're doing. I had a very capable 
second-year algebra teacher from whom I learned much math-
ematics; but he was also a bully who enjoyed reducing young 
women to tears. My interest in science was maintained through all 
those school years by reading books and magazines on science fact 
and fiction. 
College was the fulfilment of my dreams: I found teachers who 
not only understood science, but who were actually able to explain 
it. I was lucky enough to attend one of the great institutions of 
learning of the time, the University of Chicago. I was a physics 
student in a department orbiting around Enrico Fermi; I discov-
ered what true mathematical elegance is from Subrahmanyan 
Chandrasekhar; I was given the chance to talk chemistry with 
Harold Urey; over summers I was apprenticed in biology to H.J. 
Muller at Indiana University; and I learned planetary astronomy 
from its only full-time practitioner at the time, G.P. Kuiper. 
It was from Kuiper that I first got a feeling for what is called a 
back-of-the-envelope calculation: a possible explanation to a 
problem occurs to you, you pull out an old envelope, appeal to 
your knowledge of fundamental physics, scribble a few approxi-
mate equations on the envelope, substitute in likely numerical 
4 


My Teachers 
values, and see if your answer comes anywhere near explaining 
your problem. If not, you look for a different explanation. It cut 
through nonsense like a knife through butter. 
At the University of Chicago I also was lucky enough to go 
through a general education programme devised by Robert M. 
Hutchins, where science was presented as an integral part of the 
gorgeous tapestry of human knowledge. It was considered 
unthinkable for an aspiring physicist not to know Plato, Aristotle, 
Bach, Shakespeare, Gibbon, Malinowski and Freud - among 
many others. In an introductory science class, Ptolemy's view that 
the Sun revolved around the Earth was presented so compellingly 
that some students found themselves re-evaluating their commit-
ment to Copernicus. The status of the teachers in the Hutchins 
curriculum had almost nothing to do with their research; per-
versely - unlike the American university standard of today -
teachers were valued for their teaching, their ability to inform and 
inspire the next generation. 
In this heady atmosphere, I was able to fill in some of the many 
gaps in my education. Much that had been deeply mysterious, and 
not just in science, became clearer. I also witnessed at first hand 
the joy felt by those whose privilege it is to uncover a little about 
how the Universe works. 
I've always been grateful to my mentors of the 1950s, and tried 
to make sure that each of them knew my appreciation. But as I 
look back, it seems clear to me that I learned the most essential 
things not from my school teachers, nor even from my university 
professors, but from my parents, who knew nothing at all about 
science, in that single far-off year of 1939. 
5 
