THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
• Subscribe Today to the Most Amazing Magazine in the Uni-
verse. 
• Bring Miraculous Good Luck, Love, and Money into Your 
Life! These Powers Have Worked for Centuries! They Can 
Work for You. 
• Amazing Psychic Research Breakthrough. It Takes Only 5 
Minutes to Prove that Psychic Magic Powers Really Work! 
• Have You the Courage to Be Lucky, Loved and Rich? 
Guaranteed Good Fortune Will Come Your Way! Get 
Everything You Want with the Most Powerful Talismans in 
the World. 
• Men in Black: Government Agents or Aliens? 
• Increase the Power of Gemstones, Charms, Seals and Symbols. 
Improve the Effectiveness of Everything You Do. Magnify 
Your Mind Power and Abilities with the Mind Power MAGNI-
FIER. 
• The Famous Money Magnet: Would You Like More Money? 
• Testament of Lael, Sacred Scriptures of a Lost Civilization. 
• A New Book by 'Commander X' from Inner Light: The 
Controllers, the Hidden Rulers of Earth Identified. We Are the 
Property of an Alien Intelligence! 
What is the common thread that binds these ads together? Not 
UFOs. Surely it's the expectation of unlimited audience gullibil-
ity. That's why they're placed in UFO magazines - because by and 
large the very act of buying such a magazine so categorizes the 
reader. Doubtless, there are moderately sceptical and fully 
rational purchasers of these periodicals who are demeaned by 
such expectations of advertisers and editors. But if they're right 
even about the bulk of their readers, what might it mean for the 
alien abduction paradigm? 
Occasionally, I get a letter from someone who is in 'contact' 
with extraterrestrials. I am invited to 'ask them anything'. And 
so over the years I've prepared a little list of questions. The 
extraterrestrials are very advanced, remember. So I ask things 
like, 'Please provide a short proof of Fermat's Last Theorem'. 
Or the Goldbach Conjecture. And then I have to explain what 
these are because extraterrestrials will not call it Fermat's Last 
94 


Hallucinations 
Theorem. So I write out the simple equation with the exponents. I 
never get an answer. On the other hand, if I ask something like 
'Should we be good?' I almost always get an answer. Anything 
vague, especially involving conventional moral judgements, these 
aliens are extremely happy to respond to. But on anything 
specific, where there is a chance to find out if they actually know 
anything beyond what most humans know, there is only silence.* 
Something can be deduced from this differential ability to answer 
questions. 
In the good old days before the alien abduction paradigm, 
people taken aboard UFOs were offered, so they reported, 
edifying lectures on the dangers of nuclear war. Nowadays, when 
such instruction is given, the extraterrestrials seem fixated on 
environmental degradation and AIDS. How is it, I ask myself, 
that UFO occupants are so bound to fashionable or urgent 
concerns on this planet? Why not an incidental warning about 
CFCs and ozone depletion in the 1950s, or about the HIV virus in 
the 1970s, when it might really have done some good? Why not 
alert us now to some public health or environmental threat we 
haven't yet figured out? Can it be that aliens know only as much as 
those who report their presence? And if one of the chief purposes 
of alien visitations is admonitions about global dangers, why tell it 
only to a few people whose accounts are suspect anyway? Why not 
take over the television networks for a night, or appear with vivid 
cautionary audiovisuals before the United Nations Security Coun-
cil? Surely this is not too difficult for those who wing across the 
light years. 
The earliest commercially successful UFO 'contactee' was George 
Adamski. He operated a tiny restaurant at the foot of California's 
Mount Palomar, and set up a small telescope out back. At the 
summit of the mountain was the largest telescope on Earth, the 
* It's a stimulating exercise to think of questions to which no human today knows 
the answers, but where a correct answer would immediately be recognized as 
such. It's even more challenging to formulate such questions in fields other 
than mathematics. Perhaps we should hold a contest and collect the best 
responses in 'Ten Questions to Ask an Alien'. 
95 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
200-inch reflector of the Carnegie Institution of Washington and 
the California Institute of Technology. Adamski styled himself 
Professor Adamski of Mount Palomar Observatory. He published 
a book - it caused quite a sensation, I recall - in which he 
described how in the desert nearby he had encountered nice-
looking aliens with long blond hair and, if I remember correctly, 
white robes who warned Adamski about the dangers of nuclear 
war. They hailed from the planet Venus (whose 900° Fahrenheit 
surface temperature we can now recognize as a barrier to Adam-
ski's credibility). In person, he was utterly convincing. The Air 
Force officer nominally in charge of UFO investigations at the 
time described Adamski in these words: 
To look at the man and to listen to his story you had an 
immediate urge to believe him. Maybe it was his appearance. 
He was dressed in well worn, but neat, overalls. He had 
slightly graying hair and the most honest pair of eyes I've ever 
seen. 
Adamski's star slowly faded as he aged, but he self-published 
other books and was a long-standing fixture at conventions of 
flying saucer 'believers'. 
The first alien abduction story in the modern genre was that of 
Betty and Barney Hill, a New Hampshire couple, she a social 
worker and he a Post Office employee. During a late-night drive 
in 1961 through the White Mountains, Betty spotted a bright, 
initially star-like UFO that seemed to follow them. Because 
Barney feared it might harm them, they left the main highway for 
narrow mountain roads, arriving home two hours later than they'd 
expected. The experience prompted Betty to read a book that 
described UFOs as spaceships from other worlds; their occupants 
were little men who sometimes abducted humans. 
Soon after, she experienced a terrifying, repetitive nightmare in 
which she and Barney were abducted and taken aboard the UFO. 
Barney 
overheard 
her describing 
this 
dream 
to 
friends, 
co-workers and volunteer UFO investigators. (It's curious that 
Betty didn't discuss it with her husband directly.) By a week or so 
after the experience, they were describing a 'pancake'-like UFO 
96 


Hallucinations 
with uniformed figures seen through the craft's transparent windows. 
Several years later, Barney's psychiatrist referred him to a 
Boston hypnotherapist, Benjamin Simon, MD. Betty came to be 
hypnotized as well. Under hypnosis they separately filled in 
details of what had happened during the 'missing' two hours: they 
watched the UFO land on the highway and were taken, partly 
immobilized, inside the craft where short, grey, humanoid crea-
tures with long noses (a detail discordant with the current 
paradigm) subjected them to unconventional medical examina-
tions, including a needle in her navel (before amniocentesis had 
been invented on Earth). There are those who now believe that 
eggs were taken from Betty's ovaries and sperm from Barney, 
although that isn't part of the original story.* The captain showed 
Betty a map of interstellar space with the ship's routes marked. 
Martin S. Kottmeyer has shown that many of the motifs in the 
Hills' account can be found in a 1953 motion picture, Invaders 
from Mars. And Barney's story of what the aliens looked like, 
especially their enormous eyes, emerged in a hypnosis session just 
twelve days after the airing of an episode of the television series 
'The Outer Limits' in which such an alien was portrayed. 
The Hill case was widely discussed. It was made into a 1975 TV 
movie that introduced the idea that short, grey alien abductors are 
among us into the psyches of millions of people. But even the few 
scientists of the time who thought that some UFOs might in fact 
be alien spaceships were wary. The alleged encounter was con-
spicuous by its absence from the list of suggestive UFO cases 
compiled by James E. McDonald, a University of Arizona atmos-
pheric physicist. In general, those scientists who have taken UFOs 
seriously have tended to keep the alien abduction accounts at 
arm's length, while those who take alien abductions at face value 
see little reason to analyse mere lights in the sky. 
McDonald's view on UFOs was based, he said, not on irrefuta-
ble evidence, but was a conclusion of last resort: all the alternative 
* In more recent times, Ms Hill has written that in real abductions, 'no sexual 
interest is shown. However, frequently they help themselves to some of [the 
abductee's] belongings, such as fishing rods, jewelry of different types, 
eyeglasses or a cup of laundry soap.' 
97 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
explanations seemed to him even less credible. In the middle 
1960s I arranged for McDonald to present his best cases in a 
private meeting with leading physicists and astronomers who had 
not before staked a claim on the UFO issue. Not only did he fail to 
convince them that we were being visited by extraterrestrials; he 
failed even to excite their interest. And this was a group with a 
very high wonder quotient. It was simply that where McDonald 
saw aliens, they saw much more prosaic explanations. 
I was glad to have an opportunity to spend several hours with 
Mr and Mrs Hill and with Dr Simon. There was no mistaking the 
earnestness and sincerity of Betty and Barney, and their mixed 
feelings about becoming public figures under such odd and 
awkward circumstances. With the Hills' permission, Dr Simon 
played for me (and, at my invitation, McDonald) some of the 
audiotapes of their sessions under hypnosis. By far my most 
striking impression was the absolute terror in Barney's voice as he 
described - 're-lived' would be a better word - the encounter. 
Dr Simon, while a leading proponent of the virtues of hypnosis 
in war and peace, had not been caught up in the public frenzy 
about UFOs. He shared handsomely in the royalties of John 
Fuller's best-seller, Interrupted Journey, about the Hills' experi-
ence. If Dr Simon had pronounced their account authentic, the 
sales of the book might have gone through the roof and his own 
financial reward been considerably augmented. But he didn't. He 
also instantly rejected the notion that they were lying, or, as 
suggested by another psychiatrist, that this was a folie a deux - a 
shared delusion in which, generally, the submissive partner goes 
along with the delusion of the dominant partner. So what's left? 
The Hills, said their psychotherapist, had experienced a species of 
'dream'. Together. 
There may very well be more than one source of alien abduction 
accounts, just as there are for UFO sightings. Let's run through 
some of the possibilities. 
In 1894 The International Census of Waking Hallucinations was 
published in London. From that time to this, repeated surveys have 
shown that 10 to 25 per cent of ordinary, functioning people have 
experienced, at least once in their lifetimes, a vivid hallucination, 
98 


Hallucinations 
hearing a voice, usually, or seeing a form when there's no one there. 
More rarely, people sense a haunting aroma, or hear music, or 
receive a revelation that arrives independent of the senses. In some 
cases these become transforming personal events or profound reli-
gious experiences. Hallucinations may be a neglected low door in the 
wall to a scientific understanding of the sacred. 
Probably a dozen times since their deaths I've heard my mother 
or father, in a conversational tone of voice, call my name. Of 
course they called to me often during my life with them - to do a 
chore, to remind me of a responsibility, to come to dinner, to 
engage in conversation, to hear about an event of the day. I still 
miss them so much that it doesn't seem at all strange that my brain 
will occasionally retrieve a lucid recollection of their voices. 
Such hallucinations may occur to perfectly normal people under 
perfectly ordinary circumstances. Hallucinations can also be elic-
ited: by a campfire at night, or under emotional stress, or during 
epileptic seizures or migraine headaches or high fever, or by 
prolonged fasting or sleeplessness* or sensory deprivation (for 
example, in solitary confinement), or through hallucinogens such 
as LSD, psilocybin, mescaline, or hashish. (Delirium tremens, the 
dreaded alcohol-induced DTs, is one well-known manifestation of 
a withdrawal syndrome from alcoholism.) There are also mol-
ecules, such as the phenothiazines (thorazine, for example), that 
make hallucinations go away. It is very likely that the normal 
human body generates substances - perhaps including the 
morphine-like small brain proteins called endorphins - that cause 
hallucinations, and others that suppress them. Such celebrated 
* Dreams are associated with a state called REM sleep, the abbreviation 
standing for rapid eye movement. (Under the closed eyelids the eyes move, 
perhaps following the action in the dream, or perhaps randomly.) The REM 
state is strongly correlated with sexual arousal. Experiments have been 
performed in which sleeping subjects are awakened whenever the REM state 
emerges, while members of a control group are awakened just as often each 
night but not when they're dreaming. After some days, the control group is a 
little groggy, but the experimental group - the ones who are prevented from 
dreaming - is hallucinating in daytime. It's not that a few people with a 
particular abnormality can be made to hallucinate in this way; anyone is 
capable of hallucinations. 
99 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
(and unhysterical) explorers as Admiral Richard Byrd, Captain 
Joshua Slocum and Sir Ernest Shackleton all experienced vivid 
hallucinations when coping with unusual isolation and loneliness. 
Whatever their neurological and molecular antecedents, hallu-
cinations feel real. They are sought out in many cultures and 
considered a sign of spiritual enlightenment. Among the Native 
Americans of the Western Plains, for example, or many indig-
enous Siberian cultures, a young man's future was foreshadowed 
by the nature of the hallucination he experienced after a successful 
'vision quest'; its meaning was discussed with great seriousness 
among the elders and shamans of the tribe. There are countless 
instances in the world's religions where patriarchs, prophets or 
saviours repair themselves to desert or mountain and, assisted by 
hunger and sensory deprivation, encounter gods or demons. 
Psychedelic-induced religious experiences were a hallmark of the 
western youth culture of the 1960s. The experience, however 
brought about, is often described respectfully by words such as 
'transcendent', 'numinous', 'sacred' and 'holy'. 
Hallucinations are common. If you have one, it doesn't mean 
you're crazy. The anthropological literature is replete with hallu-
cination ethnopsychiatry, REM dreams and possession trances, 
which have many common elements transculturally and across the 
ages. The hallucinations are routinely interpreted as possession by 
good or evil spirits. The Yale anthropologist Weston La Barre 
goes so far as to argue that 'a surprisingly good case could be made 
that much of culture is hallucination' and that 'the whole intent 
and function of ritual appears to be . . . [a] group wish to 
hallucinate reality'. 
Here is a description of hallucinations as a signal-to-noise 
problem by Louis J. West, former medical director of the Neu-
ropsychiatric Clinic at the University of California, Los Angeles. 
It is taken from the fifteenth edition of the Encyclopaedia 
Britannica: 
[I]magine a man standing at a closed glass window opposite 
his fireplace, looking out at his garden in the sunset. He is so 
absorbed by the view of the outside world that he fails to 
visualize the interior of the room at all. As it becomes darker 
100 


Hallucinations 
outside, however, images of the objects in the room behind 
him can be seen reflected dimly in the window glass. For a 
time he may see either the garden (if he gazes into the 
distance) or the reflection of the room's interior (if he focuses 
on the glass a few inches from his face). Night falls, but the 
fire still burns brightly in the fireplace and illuminates the 
room. The watcher now sees in the glass a vivid reflection of 
the interior of the room behind him, which appears to be 
outside the window. This illusion becomes dimmer as the fire 
dies down, and, finally, when it is dark both outside and 
within, nothing more is seen. If the fire flares up from time to 
time, the visions in the glass reappear. 
In an analogous way, hallucinatory experiences such as those 
of normal dreams occur when the 'daylight' (sensory input) is 
reduced while the 'interior illumination' (general level of brain 
arousal) remains 'bright', and images originating within the 
'rooms' of our brains may be perceived (hallucinated) as though 
they came from outside the 'windows' of our senses. 
Another analogy might be that dreams, like the stars, are 
shining all the time. Though the stars are not often seen by day, 
since the sun shines too brightly, if, during the day, there is an 
eclipse of the sun, or if a viewer chooses to be watchful awhile 
after sunset or awhile before sunrise, or if he is awakened from 
time to time on a clear night to look at the sky, then the stars, 
like dreams, though often forgotten, may always be seen. 
A more brain-related concept is that of a continuous 
information-processing activity (a kind of 'preconscious 
stream') that is influenced continually by both conscious and 
unconscious forces and that constitutes the potential supply 
of dream content. The dream is an experience during which, 
for a few minutes, the individual has some awareness of the 
stream of data being processed. Hallucinations in the waking 
state also would involve the same phenomenon, produced by 
a somewhat different set of psychological or physiological 
circumstances . . . 
It appears that all human behaviour and experience (normal 
as well as abnormal) is well attended by illusory and hallucina-
tory phenomena. While the relationship of these phenomena to 
101 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
mental illness has been well documented, their role in everyday 
life has perhaps not been considered enough. Greater under-
standing of illusions and hallucinations among normal people 
may provide explanations for experiences otherwise relegated 
to the uncanny, 'extrasensory', or supernatural. 
We would surely be missing something important about our own 
nature if we refused to face up to the fact that hallucinations are 
part of being human. However, none of this makes hallucinations 
part of an external rather than an internal reality. Five to ten per 
cent of us are extremely suggestible, able to move at a command 
into a deep hypnotic trance. Roughly ten per cent of Americans 
report having seen one or more ghosts. This is more than the 
number who allegedly remember being abducted by aliens, about 
the same as the number who've reported seeing one or more 
UFOs, and less than the number who in the last week of Richard 
Nixon's Presidency, before he resigned to avoid impeachment, 
thought he was doing a good-to-excellent job as President. At 
least one per cent of all of us is schizophrenic. This amounts to 
over 50 million schizophrenics on the planet, more than the 
population of, say, England. 
In his 1970 book on nightmares, the psychiatrist John Mack -
about whom I will have more to say - writes: 
There is a period in early childhood in which dreams are 
regarded as real and in which the events, transformations, 
gratifications, and threats of which they are composed are 
regarded by the child as if they were as much a part of his 
actual daily life as his daytime experiences. The capacity to 
establish and maintain clear distinctions between the life of 
dreams and life in the outside world is hard-won and requires 
several years to accomplish, not being completed even in 
normal children before ages eight to ten. Nightmares, 
because of their vividness and compelling effective intensity, 
are particularly difficult for the child to judge realistically. 
When a child tells a fabulous story - a witch was grimacing in the 
darkened room; a tiger is lurking under the bed; the vase was 
102 


Hallucinations 
broken by a multi-coloured bird that flew in the window and 
not because, contrary to family rules, a football was being 
kicked inside the house - is he or she consciously lying? Surely 
parents often act as if the child cannot fully distinguish between 
fantasy and reality. Some children have active imaginations; 
others are less well endowed in this department. Some families 
may respect the ability to fantasize and encourage the child, 
while at the same time saying something like 'Oh, that's not 
real; that's just your imagination.' Other families may be 
impatient about confabulating - it makes running the house-
hold and adjudicating disputes at least marginally more difficult 
- and discourage their children from fantasizing, perhaps even 
teaching them to think it's something shameful. A few parents 
may be unclear about the distinction between reality and 
fantasy themselves, or may even seriously enter into the 
fantasy. Out of all these contending propensities and child-
rearing practices, some people emerge with an intact ability to 
fantasize, and a history, extending well into adulthood, of 
confabulation. Others grow up believing that anyone who 
doesn't know the difference between reality and fantasy is 
crazy. Most of us are somewhere in between. 
Abductees frequently report having seen 'aliens' in their child-
hood - coming in through the window or from under the bed or 
out of the closet. But everywhere in the world children report 
similar stories, with fairies, elves, brownies, ghosts, goblins, 
witches, imps and a rich variety of imaginary 'friends'. Are we to 
imagine two different groups of children, one that sees imaginary 
earthly beings and the other that sees genuine extraterrestrials? 
Isn't it more reasonable that both groups are seeing, or hallucinat-
ing, the same thing? 
Most of us recall being frightened at the age of two and older by 
real-seeming but wholly imaginary 'monsters', especially at night 
or in the dark. I can still remember occasions when I was 
absolutely terrified, hiding under the bedclothes until I could 
stand it no longer, and then bolting for the safety of my parents' 
bedroom - if only I could get there before falling into the clutches 
of . . . The Presence. The American cartoonist Gary Larson who 
draws in the horror genre dedicates one of his books as follows: 
103 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
When I was a boy, our house was filled with monsters. They 
lived in the closets, under the beds, in the attic, in the 
basement, and - when it was dark - just about everywhere. 
This book is dedicated to my father, who kept me safe from 
all of them. 
Maybe the abduction therapists should be doing more of that. 
Part of the reason that children are afraid of the dark may be 
that, in our entire evolutionary history up until just a moment 
ago, they never slept alone. Instead, they nestled safely, 
protected by an adult, usually Mum. In the enlightened west we 
stick them alone in a dark room, say goodnight, and have 
difficulty understanding why they're sometimes upset. It makes 
good evolutionary sense for children to have fantasies of scary 
monsters. In a world stalked by lions and hyenas, such fantasies 
help prevent defenceless toddlers from wandering too far from 
their guardians. How can this safety machinery be effective for 
a vigorous, curious young animal unless it delivers industrial 
strength terror? Those who are not afraid of monsters tend not 
to leave descendants. Eventually, I imagine, over the course of 
human evolution, almost all children become afraid of mon-
sters. But if we're capable of conjuring up terrifying monsters 
in childhood, why shouldn't some of us, at least on occasion, be 
able to fantasize something similar, something truly horrifying, 
a shared delusion, as adults? 
It is telling that alien abductions occur mainly on falling 
asleep or when waking up, or on long automobile drives where 
there is a well-known danger of falling into some autohypnotic 
reverie. Abduction therapists are puzzled when their patients 
describe crying out in terror while their spouses sleep leadenly 
beside them. But isn't this typical of dreams, our shouts for 
help unheard? Might these stories have something to do with 
sleep and, as Benjamin Simon proposed for the Hills, a kind of 
dream? 
A common, although insufficiently well-known, psychological 
syndrome rather like alien abduction is called sleep paralysis. 
Many people experience it. It happens in that twilight world 
between being fully awake and fully asleep. For a few minutes, 
104 


Hallucinations 
maybe longer, you're immobile and acutely anxious. You feel a 
weight on your chest as if some being is sitting or lying there. Your 
heartbeat is quick, your breathing laboured. You may experience 
auditory or visual hallucinations of people, demons, ghosts, 
animals or birds. In the right setting, the experience can have 'the 
full force and impact of reality', according to Robert Baker, a 
psychologist at the University of Kentucky. Sometimes there's a 
marked sexual component to the hallucination. Baker argues that 
these common sleep disturbances are behind many if not most of 
the alien abduction accounts. (He and others suggest that there 
are other classes of abduction claims as well, made by fantasy-
prone individuals, say, or hoaxers.) 
Similarly, the Harvard Mental Health Letter (September 1994) 
comments, 
Sleep paralysis may last for several minutes, and is sometimes 
accompanied by vivid dreamlike hallucinations that give rise 
to stories about visitations from gods, spirits, and extraterres-
trial creatures. 
We know from early work of the Canadian neurophysiologist 
Wilder Penfield that electrical stimulation of certain regions of 
the brain elicits full-blown hallucinations. People with temporal 
lobe epilepsy - involving a cascade of naturally generated 
electrical impulses in the part of the brain beneath the forehead 
- experience a range of hallucinations almost indistinguishable 
from reality: including the presence of one or more strange 
beings, anxiety, floating through the air, sexual experiences, 
and a sense of missing time. There is also what feels like 
profound insight into the deepest questions and a need to 
spread the word. A continuum of spontaneous temporal lobe 
stimulation seems to stretch from people with serious epilepsy 
to the most average among us. In at least one case reported by 
another Canadian neuroscientist, Michael Persinger, adminis-
tration of the antiepileptic drug, carbamazepine, eliminated a 
woman's recurring sense of experiencing the standard alien 
abduction scenario. So such hallucinations, generated sponta-
neously, or with chemical or experiential assists, may play a 
105 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
role, perhaps a central role, in the UFO accounts. 
But such a view is easy to burlesque: UFOs explained away as 
'mass hallucinations'. Everyone knows there's no such thing as a 
shared hallucination. Right? 
As the possibility of extraterrestrial life began to be widely 
popularized - especially around the turn of the last century by 
Percival Lowell with his Martian canals - people began to 
report contact with aliens, mainly Martians. The psychologist 
Theodore Flournoy's 1901 book, From India to the Planet Mars, 
describes a French-speaking medium who in a trance state drew 
pictures of the Martians (they look just like us) and presented 
their alphabet and language (remarkably like French). The 
psychiatrist Carl Jung in his 
1902 doctoral dissertation 
described a young Swiss woman who was agitated to discover, 
sitting across from her on the train, a 'star-dweller' from Mars. 
Martians are innocent of science, philosophy and souls, she was 
told, but have advanced technology. 'Flying machines have 
long been in existence on Mars; the whole of Mars is covered 
with canals' and so on. Charles Fort, a collector of anomalous 
reports who died in 1932, wrote, 'Perhaps there are inhabitants 
of Mars, who are secretly sending reports upon the ways of this 
world to their governments.' In the 1950s there was a book by 
Gerald Heard that revealed the saucer occupants to be intelli-
gent Martian bees. Who else could survive the fantastic right 
angle turns reported for UFOs? 
But after the canals were shown to be illusory by Mariner 9 in 
1971, and after no compelling evidence even for microbes was 
found on Mars by Vikings 1 and 2 in 1976, popular enthusiasm for 
the Lowellian Mars waned and we heard little about visiting 
Martians. Aliens were then reported to come from somewhere 
else. Why? Why no more Martians? And after the surface of 
Venus was found to be hot enough to melt lead, there were no 
more visiting Venusians. Does some part of these stories adjust to 
the current canons of belief? What does that imply about their 
origin? 
There's no doubt that humans commonly hallucinate. There's 
considerable doubt about whether extraterrestrials exist, frequent 
106 


Hallucinations 
our planet, or abduct and molest us. We might argue about 
details, but the one category of explanation is surely much better 
supported than the other. The main reservation you might then 
have is: why do so many people today report this particular set of 
hallucinations? Why sombre little beings, and flying saucers, and 
sexual experimentation? 
107 


The Demon-Haunted World 
There are demon-haunted worlds, regions of utter darkness. 
The ISA Upanishad 
(India, c. 600 BC) 
Fear of things invisible is the natural seed of that which 
every one in himself calleth religion. 
Thomas Hobbes, 
Leviathan (1651) 
T
he gods watch over us and guide our destinies, many human 
cultures teach; other entities, more malevolent, are responsi-
ble for the existence of evil. Both classes of beings, whether 
considered natural or supernatural, real or imaginary, serve 
human needs. Even if they're wholly fanciful, people feel better 
believing in them. So in an age when traditional religions have 
been under withering fire from science, is it not natural to wrap up 
the old gods and demons in scientific raiment and call them aliens? 
Belief in demons was widespread in the ancient world. They were 
thought of as natural rather than supernatural beings. Hesiod 
casually mentions them. Socrates described his philosophical 
inspiration as the work of a personal, benign demon. His teacher, 
Diotima of Mantineia, tells him (in Plato's Symposium) that 
'Everything demonic is intermediate between God and mortal. 
108 
7 
