The Dragon in My Garage 
An so on. I counter every physical test you propose with a 
special explanation of why it won't work. 
Now, what's the difference between an invisible, incorporeal, 
floating dragon who spits heatless fire and no dragon at all? If 
there's no way to disprove my contention, no conceivable experi-
ment that would count against it, what does it mean to say that my 
dragon exists? Your inability to invalidate my hypothesis is not at 
all the same thing as proving it true. Claims that cannot be tested, 
assertions immune to disproof are veridically worthless, whatever 
value they may have in inspiring us or in exciting our sense of 
wonder. What I'm asking you to do comes down to believing, in 
the absence of evidence, on my say-so. 
The only thing you've really learned from my insistence that 
there's a dragon in my garage is that something funny is going on 
inside my head. You'd wonder, if no physical tests apply, what 
convinced me. The possibility that it was a dream or a hallucina-
tion would certainly enter your mind. But then why am I taking it 
so seriously? Maybe I need help. At the least, maybe I've 
seriously underestimated human fallibility. 
Imagine that, despite none of the tests being successful, you wish 
to be scrupulously open-minded. So you don't outright reject the 
notion that there's a fire-breathing dragon in my garage. You merely 
put it on hold. Present evidence is strongly against it, but if a new 
body of data emerges you're prepared to examine it and see if it 
convinces you. Surely it's unfair of me to be offended at not being 
believed; or to criticize you for being stodgy and unimaginative, 
merely because you rendered the Scottish verdict of 'not proved'. 
Imagine that things had gone otherwise. The dragon is invisible, 
all right, but footprints are being made in the flour as you watch. 
Your infrared detector reads off-scale. The spray paint reveals a 
jagged crest bobbing in the air before you. No matter how 
sceptical you might have been about the existence of dragons - to 
say nothing about invisible ones - you must now acknowledge that 
there's something here, and that in a preliminary way it's consist-
ent with an invisible, fire-breathing dragon. 
Now another scenario: suppose it's not just me. Suppose that 
several people of your acquaintance, including people who you're 
pretty sure don't know each other, all tell you they have dragons 
161 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
in their garages, but in every case the evidence is maddeningly 
elusive: All of us admit we're disturbed at being gripped by so odd 
a conviction so ill-supported by the physical evidence. None of us 
is a lunatic. We speculate about what it would mean if invisible 
dragons were really hiding out in garages all over the world, with 
us humans just catching on. I'd rather it not be true, I tell you. But 
maybe all those ancient European and Chinese myths about 
dragons weren't myths at all . . . 
Gratifyingly, some dragon-size footprints in the flour are now 
reported. But they're never made when a sceptic is looking. An 
alternative explanation presents itself: on close examination it 
seems clear that the footprints could have been faked. Another 
dragon enthusiast shows up with a burned finger and attributes it 
to a rare physical manifestation of the dragon's fiery breath. But 
again, other possibilities exist. We understand that there are other 
ways to burn fingers besides the breath of invisible dragons. Such 
'evidence' - no matter how important the dragon advocates 
consider it - is far from compelling. Once again, the only sensible 
approach is tentatively to reject the dragon hypothesis, to be open 
to future physical data, and to wonder what the cause might be 
that so many apparently sane and sober people share the same 
strange delusion. 
Magic requires tacit cooperation of the audience with the magi-
cian - an abandonment of scepticism, or what is sometimes 
described as the willing suspension of disbelief. It immediately 
follows that to penetrate the magic, to expose the trick, we must 
cease collaborating. 
How can further progress be made in this emotionally laden, 
controversial and vexing subject? Patients might exercise caution 
about therapists quick to deduce or confirm alien abductions. 
Those treating abductees might explain to their patients that 
hallucinations are normal, and that childhood sexual abuse is 
disconcertingly common. They might bear in mind that no client 
can be wholly uncontaminated by the aliens in popular culture. 
They might take scrupulous care not subtly to lead the witness. 
They might teach their clients scepticism. They might recharge 
their own dwindling reserves of the same commodity. 
162 


The Dragon in My Garage 
Purported alien abductions trouble many people and in more 
ways than one. The subject is a window into the internal lives of 
our fellows. If many falsely report being abducted, this is cause for 
worry. But much more worrisome is that so many therapists 
accept these reports at face value, with inadequate attention given 
to the suggestibility of clients and to unconscious cuing by their 
interlocutors. 
I'm surprised that there are psychiatrists and others with at least 
some scientific training, who know the imperfections of the 
human mind, but who dismiss the idea that these accounts might 
be some species of hallucination, or some kind of screen memory. 
I'm even more surprised by claims that the alien abduction story 
represents true magic, that it is a challenge to our grip on reality, 
or that it constitutes support for a mystical view of the world. Or, 
as the matter is put by John Mack, 'There are phenomena 
important enough to warrant serious research, and the metaphys-
ics of the dominant Western scientific paradigm may be inad-
equate fully to support this research.' In an interview with Time 
magazine, he goes on to say: 
I don't know why there's such a zeal to find a conventional 
physical explanation. I don't know why people have such 
trouble simply accepting the fact that something unusual is 
going on here . . . We've lost all that ability to know a world 
beyond the physical.* 
But we know that hallucinations arise from sensory deprivation, 
drugs, illness and high fever, a lack of REM sleep, changes in 
brain chemistry and so on, And even if, with Mack, we took the 
cases at face value, their remarkable aspects (slithering through 
walls and so on) are more readily attributable to something well 
within the realm of 'the physical' - advanced alien technology -
than to witchcraft. 
A friend of mine claims that the only interesting question in the 
* And then, in a sentence that reminds us how close the alien abduction 
paradigm is to messianic and chiliastic religion, Mack concludes, 'I am a bridge 
between those two worlds.' 
163 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
alien abduction paradigm is 'Who's conning who?' Is the client 
deceiving the therapist, or vice versa? I disagree. For one thing, 
there are many other interesting questions about claims of alien 
abduction. For another, those two alternatives aren't mutually 
exclusive. 
Something about the alien abduction cases tugged at my memory 
for years. Finally, I remembered. It was a 1954 book I had read in 
college, The Fifty-Minute Hour. The author, a psychoanalyst named 
Robert Lindner, had been called by the Los Alamos National 
Laboratory to treat a brilliant young nuclear physicist whose delu-
sional system was beginning to interfere with his secret government 
research. The physicist (given the pseudonym Kirk Allen) had, it 
turned out, another life besides making nuclear weapons: in the far 
future, he confided, he piloted (or will pilot - the tenses get a little 
addled) interstellar spacecraft. He enjoyed rousing, swashbuckling 
adventures on planets of other stars. He was 'lord' of many worlds. 
Perhaps they called him Captain Kirk. Not only could he 'remember' 
this other life; he could also enter into it whenever he chose. By 
thinking in the right way, by wishing, he could transport himself 
across the light years and the centuries. 
In some way I could not comprehend, by merely desiring it to 
be so, I had crossed the immensities of space, broken out of 
time, and merged with - literally became - that distant and 
future self . . . Don't ask me to explain. I can't, although 
God knows I've tried. 
Lindner found him intelligent, sensitive, pleasant, polite and 
perfectly able to deal with everyday human affairs. But, in 
reflecting on the excitement of his life among the stars, Allen had 
found himself a little bored with his life on Earth, even if it did 
involve building weapons of mass destruction. When admonished 
by his laboratory supervisors for distraction and dreaminess, he 
apologized; he would try, he assured them, to spend more time on 
this planet. That's when they contacted Lindner. 
Allen had written 12,000 pages on his experiences in the future, 
and dozens of technical treatises on the geography, politics, architec-
ture, astronomy, geology, life forms, genealogy and ecology of the 
164 


The Dragon in My Garage 
planets of other stars. A flavour of the material is given by these 
monograph titles: 'The Unique Brain Development of the Chrysto-
peds of Srom Norba X', 'Fire Worship and Sacrifice on Srom Sodrat 
IT, "The History of the Intergalactic Scientific Institute', and 'The 
Application of Unified Field Theory and the Mechanics of the 
Stardrive to Space Travel'. (That last is the one I'd like to see; after 
all, Allen was said to have been a first-rate physicist.) Fascinated, 
Lindner pored over the material. 
Allen was not in the least shy about presenting his writings to 
Lindner or discussing them in detail. Unflappable and intellectu-
ally formidable, he seemed not to be yielding an inch to Lindner's 
psychiatric ministrations. When everything else failed, the psy-
chiatrist attempted something different: 
I tried . . . to avoid giving in any way the impression that I 
was entering the lists with him to prove that he was psychotic, 
that this was to be a tug of war over the question of his sanity. 
Instead, because it was obvious that both his temperament 
and training were scientific, I set myself to capitalize on the 
one quality he had demonstrated throughout his life . . . the 
quality that urged him toward a scientific career: his curios-
ity .. . This meant . . . that at least for the time being I 
'accepted' the validity of his experiences . . . In a sudden 
flash of inspiration it came to me that in order to separate 
Kirk from his madness it was necessary for me to enter his 
fantasy and, from that position, to pry him loose from the 
psychosis. 
Lindner highlighted certain apparent contradictions in the docu-
ments and asked Allen to resolve them. This required the 
physicist to re-enter the future to find the answers. Dutifully, 
Allen would arrive at the next session with a clarifying document 
written in his neat hand. Lindner found himself eagerly awaiting 
each interview, so he could be once more captivated by the vision 
of abundant life and intelligence in the galaxy. Between them, 
they were able to resolve many problems of consistency. 
Then a strange thing happened: 'The materials of Kirk's 
psychosis and the Achilles heel of my personality met and meshed 
165 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
like the gears of a clock.' The psychoanalyst became a 
co-conspirator in his patient's delusion. He began to reject 
psychological explanations of Allen's story. How sure are we that 
it couldn't really be true? He found himself defending the notion 
that another life, that of a spacefarer in the far future, could be 
entered into by a simple effort of the will. 
At a startlingly rapid rate . . . larger and larger areas of my 
mind were being taken over by the fantasy . . . With Kirk's 
puzzled assistance I was taking part in cosmic adventures, 
sharing the exhilaration of the sweeping extravaganza he had 
plotted. 
But eventually, an even stranger thing happened: concerned for 
the well-being of his therapist, and mustering admirable reserves 
of integrity and courage, Kirk Allen confessed: he had made the 
whole thing up. It had roots in his lonely childhood and his 
unsuccessful relationships with women. He had shaded, and then 
forgotten, the boundary between reality and imagination. Filling 
in plausible details and weaving a rich tapestry about other worlds 
was challenging and exhilarating. He was sorry he had led Lindner 
down this primrose path. 
'Why,' the psychiatrist asked, 'why did you pretend? Why did 
you keep on telling me . . .?' 
'Because I felt I had to,' the physicist replied. 'Because I felt 
you wanted me to.' 
'Kirk and I reversed roles,' Lindner explained, 
and, in one of those startling denouements that make my 
work the unpredictable, wonderful and rewarding pursuit it 
is, the folly we shared collapsed . . . I employed the rationali-
zation of clinical altruism for personal ends and thus fell into 
a trap that awaits all unwary therapists of the mind . . . Until 
Kirk Allen came into my life, I had never doubted my own 
stability. The aberrations of mind, so I had always thought, 
were for others . . . I am ashamed by this smugness. But 
now, as I listen from my chair behind the couch, I know 
better. I know that my chair and the couch are separated only 
166 


The Dragon in My Garage 
by a thin line. I know that it is, after all, but a happier 
combination of accidents that determines, finally, who shall 
lie on the couch, and who shall sit behind it. 
I'm not sure from this account that Kirk Allen was truly delu-
sional. Maybe he was just suffering from some character disorder 
which delighted in inventing charades at the expense of others. I 
don't know to what extent Lindner may have embellished or 
invented part of the story. While he wrote of 'sharing' and of 
'entering' Allen's fantasy, there is nothing to suggest that the 
psychiatrist imagined he himself voyaged to the far future and 
partook of interstellar high adventure. Likewise, John Mack and 
the other alien abduction therapists do not suggest that they have 
been abducted; only their patients. 
What if the physicist hadn't confessed? Might Lindner have 
convinced himself, beyond a reasonable doubt, that it really was 
possible to slip into a more romantic era? Would he have said he 
started out as a sceptic, but was convinced by the sheer weight of 
the evidence? Might he have advertised himself as an expert who 
assists space travellers from the future who are stranded in the 
twentieth century? Would the existence of such a psychiatric 
speciality encourage others to take fantasies or delusions of this 
sort seriously? After a few similar cases, would Lindner have 
impatiently resisted all arguments of the 'Be reasonable, Bob' 
variety, and deduced he was penetrating some new level of 
reality? 
His scientific training helped to save Kirk Allen from his 
madness. There was a moment when therapist and patient had 
exchanged roles. I like to think of it as the patient saving the 
therapist. Perhaps John Mack was not so lucky. 
Consider a very different approach to finding aliens - the radio 
search for extraterrestrial intelligence. How is this different from 
fantasy and pseudoscience? In Moscow in the early 1960s, Soviet 
astronomers held a press conference in which they announced that 
the intense radio emission from a mysterious distant object called 
CTA-102 was varying regularly, like a sine wave, with a period of 
about 100 days. No periodic distant source had ever before been 
167 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
found. Why did they convene a press conference to announce so 
arcane a discovery? Because they thought they had detected an 
extraterrestrial civilization of immense powers. Surely, that's worth 
calling a press conference for. The report was briefly a media 
sensation, and the rock group, The Byrds, even composed and 
recorded a song about it. ('CTA-102, we're over here receiving you./ 
Signals tell us that you're there./ We can hear them loud and 
clear...') 
Radio emission from CTA-102? Certainly. But what is CTA-102? 
Today we know that CTA-102 is a distant quasar. At the time, the 
word 'quasar' had not even been coined. We still don't know very 
well what quasars are; and there is more than one mutually exclu-
sive explanation for them in scientific literature. Nevertheless, no 
astronomers today, including those involved in that Moscow press 
conference, seriously contend that a quasar like CTA-102 is some 
extraterrestrial civilization billions of light years away with access 
to immense power levels. Why not? Because we have alternative 
explanations of the properties of quasars that are consistent with 
known physical laws and that do not invoke alien life. Extraterres-
trials represent a hypothesis of last resort. You reach for it only if 
everything else fails. 
In 1967, British scientists found a much nearer intense radio 
source turning on and off with astonishing precision, its period 
constant to ten or more significant figures. What was it? Their first 
thought was that it was a message intended for us, or maybe an 
interstellar navigation and timing beacon for spacecraft that ply the 
space between the stars. They even gave it, among themselves at 
Cambridge University, the wry designation LGM-1 - LGM stand-
ing for Little Green Men. 
However, they were wiser than their Soviet counterparts. They 
did not call a press conference. It soon became clear that what 
they were observing was what is now called a 'pulsar', the first 
pulsar to be discovered. So, what's a pulsar? A pulsar is the end 
state of a massive star, a sun shrunk to the size of a city, held up 
as no other stars are, not by gas pressure, not by electron 
degeneracy, but by nuclear forces. It is in a certain sense an 
atomic nucleus a mile or so across. Now that, I maintain, is a 
notion at least as bizarre as an interstellar navigation beacon. The 


The Dragon in My Garage 
answer to what a pulsar is has to be something mighty strange. It 
isn't an extraterrestrial civilization. It's something else: but a 
something else that opens our eyes and our minds and indicates 
unguessed possibilities in Nature. Anthony Hewish won the Nobel 
Prize in physics for the discovery of pulsars. 
The original Ozma experiment (the first intentional radio 
search for extraterrestrial intelligence), the Harvard University/ 
Planetary Society META (Megachannel Extraterrestrial Assay) 
programme, the Ohio State University search, the SERENDIP 
Project of the University of California, Berkeley, and many other 
groups have all detected anomalous signals from space that make 
the observer's heart palpitate a little. We think for a moment that 
we've picked up a genuine signal of intelligent origin from far 
beyond our solar system. In reality, we have not the foggiest idea 
what it is, because the signal does not repeat. A few minutes later, 
or the next day, or years later you turn the same telescope to the 
same spot in the sky with the same frequency, bandpass, polariza-
tion, and everything else, and you don't hear a thing. You don't 
deduce, much less announce, aliens. It may have been a statisti-
cally inevitable electronic surge, or a malfunction in the detection 
system, or a spacecraft (from Earth), or a military aircraft flying 
by and broadcasting on channels that are supposed to be reserved 
for radio astronomy. Maybe it's even a garage door opener down 
the street or a radio station a hundred kilometres away. There are 
many possibilities. You must systematically check out all the 
alternatives, and see which ones can be eliminated. You don't 
declare that aliens have been found when your only evidence is an 
enigmatic non-repeating signal. 
And if the signal did repeat, would you then announce it to the 
press and the public? You would not. Maybe someone's hoaxing 
you. Maybe it's something you haven't been smart enough to 
figure out that's happening to your detection system. Maybe it's 
some previously unrecognized astrophysical source. Instead, you 
would call scientists at other radio observatories and inform them 
that at this particular spot in the sky, at this frequency and 
bandpass and all the rest, you seem to be getting something funny. 
Could they please see if they can confirm? Only if several 
independent observers - all of them fully aware of the complexity 
169 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
of Nature and the fallibility of observers - get the same kind of 
information from the same spot in the sky do you seriously 
consider that you have detected a genuine signal from alien 
beings. 
There's a certain discipline involved. We can't just go off 
shouting 'little green men' every time we detect something we 
don't at first understand, because we're going to look mighty silly 
- as the Soviet radio astronomers did with CTA-102 - when it 
turns out to be something else. Special cautions are necessary 
when the stakes are high. We are not obliged to make up our 
minds before the evidence is in. It's permitted not to be sure. 
I'm frequently asked, 'Do you believe there's extraterrestrial 
intelligence?' I give the standard arguments - there are a lot of 
places out there, the molecules of life are everywhere, I use the 
word billions, and so on. Then I say it would be astonishing to me 
if there weren't extraterrestrial intelligence, but of course there is 
as yet no compelling evidence for it. 
Often, I'm asked next, 'What do you really think?' 
I say, 'I just told you what I really think.' 
'Yes, but what's your gut feeling?' 
But I try not to think with my gut. If I'm serious about 
understanding the world, thinking with anything besides my brain, 
as tempting as that might be, is likely to get me into trouble. 
Really, it's okay to reserve judgement until the evidence is in. 
I would be very happy if flying saucer advocates and alien 
abduction proponents were right and real evidence of extraterres-
trial life were here for us to examine. They do not ask us, though, 
to believe on faith. They ask us to believe on the strength of their 
evidence. Surely it is our duty to scrutinize the purported evidence 
at least as closely and sceptically as radio astronomers do who are 
searching for alien radio signals. 
No anecdotal claim - no matter how sincere, no matter how 
deeply felt, no matter how exemplary the lives of the attesting 
citizens - carries much weight on so important a question. As in 
the older UFO cases, anecdotal accounts are subject to irreducible 
error. This is not a personal criticism of those who say they've 
been abducted or of those who interrogate them. It is not 
170 


The Dragon in My Garage 
tantamount to contempt for purported witnesses." It is not, or 
should not be, arrogant dismissal of sincere and affecting testi-
mony. It is merely a reluctant response to human fallibility. 
If any powers whatever may be ascribed to the aliens - because 
their technology is so advanced - then we can account for any 
discrepancy, inconsistency or implausibility. For instance, one 
academic UFOlogist suggests that both the aliens and the abduct-
ees are rendered invisible during the abduction (although not to 
each other); that's why more of the neighbours haven't noticed. 
Such 'explanations' can explain anything, and therefore in fact 
nothing. 
American police procedure concentrates on evidence and not 
anecdotes. As the European witch trials remind us, suspects can 
be intimidated during interrogation; people confess to crimes they 
never committed; eyewitnesses can be mistaken. This is also the 
linchpin of much detective fiction. But real, unfabricated evidence 
- powder burns, fingerprints, DNA samples, footprints, hair 
under the fingernails of the struggling victim - carry great weight. 
Criminalists employ something very close to the scientific method, 
and for the same reasons. So in the world of UFOs and alien 
abductions, it is fair to ask: where is the evidence - the real, 
unambiguous physical evidence, the data that would convince a 
jury that hasn't already made up its mind? 
Some enthusiasts argue that there are 'thousands' of cases of 
'disturbed' soil where UFOs supposedly landed, and why isn't that 
good enough? It isn't good enough because there are ways of 
disturbing the soil other than by aliens in UFOs - humans with 
shovels is a possibility that springs readily to mind. One UFOlo-
gist rebukes me for ignoring '4,400 physical trace cases from 65 
countries'. But not one of these cases, so far as I know, has been 
analysed with results published in a peer-reviewed journal in 
physics or chemistry, metallurgy or soil science, showing that the 
'traces' could not have been generated by people. It's a modest 
enough scam compared, say, with the crop circles of Wiltshire. 
*They cannot be called, simply, witnesses - because whether they witnessed 
anything (or, at least, anything in the outside world) is often the very point at 
issue. 
171 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
Likewise, not only can photographs easily be faked, but huge 
numbers of alleged photographs of UFOs have without a doubt 
been faked. Some enthusiasts go out night after night into a field 
looking for bright lights in the sky. When they see one, they flash 
their flashlights. Sometimes, they say, there's an answering flash. 
Well, maybe. But low-altitude aircraft make lights in the sky, and 
pilots are able, if so inclined, to blink their lights back. None of 
this constitutes anything approaching serious evidence. 
Where is the physical evidence? As in satanic ritual abuse 
claims (and echoing 'Devil's marks' in the witch trials), the most 
common physical evidence pointed to are scars and 'scoop marks' 
on the bodies of abductees - who say they have no knowledge of 
where their scars came from. But this point is key: if the scars are 
within human capacity to generate, then they cannot be compel-
ling physical evidence of abuse by aliens. Indeed, there are 
well-known psychiatric disorders in which people scoop, scar, 
tear, cut and mutilate themselves (or others). And some of us with 
high pain thresholds and bad memories can injure ourselves 
accidentally with no recollection of the event. 
One of John Mack's patients claims to have scars all over her 
body that are wholly baffling to her physicians. What do they look 
like? Oh, she can't show them; as in the witch mania, they're in 
private places. Mack considers this compelling evidence. Has he 
seen the scars? Can we have photographs of the scars taken by a 
sceptical physician? Mack knows, he says, a quadriplegic with 
scoop marks and considers this a reductio ad absurdum of the 
sceptical position; how can a quadriplegic scar himself? The 
argument is a good one only if the quadriplegic is hermetically 
sealed in a room to which no other human has access. Can we see 
his scars? Can an independent physician examine him? Another of 
Mack's patients says that the aliens have been taking eggs from 
her since she was sexually mature, and that her reproductive 
system baffles her gynaecologist. Is it baffling enough to write the 
case up and submit a research paper to The New England Journal 
of Medicine? Apparently it's not that baffling. 
Then we have the fact that one of his subjects made the whole 
thing up, as reported by Time magazine, and Mack didn't have a 
clue. He bought it hook, line and sinker. What are his standards of 
172 


The Dragon in My Garage 
critical scrutiny? If he allowed himself to be deceived by one 
subject, how do we know the same wasn't true of all? 
Mack talks about these cases, the 'phenomena', as posing a 
fundamental challenge to western thinking, to science, to logic 
itself. Probably, he says, the abducting entities are not alien 
beings from our own universe, but visitors from 'another dimen-
sion'. Here's a typical, and revealing, passage from his book: 
When abductees call their experience 'dreams', which they 
often do, close questioning can elicit that this may be a 
euphemism to cover what they are sure cannot be that, 
namely an event from which there was no awakening that 
occurred in another dimension. 
Now the idea of higher dimensions did not arise from the brow of 
UFOlogy or the New Age. Instead, it is part and parcel of the 
physics of the twentieth century. Since Einstein's general relativ-
ity, a truism of cosmology is that space-time is bent or curved 
through a higher physical dimension. Kaluza-Klein theory posits 
an eleven-dimensional universe. Mack presents a thoroughly 
scientific idea as the key to 'phenomena' beyond the reach of 
science. 
We know something about how a higher-dimensional object 
would look in encountering our three-dimensional universe. For 
clarity, let's go down one dimension: an apple passing through a 
plane must change its shape as perceived by two-dimensional 
beings confined to the plane. First it seems to be a point, then 
larger apple cross-sections, then smaller ones, a point again, and 
finally - poof! - gone. Similarly, a fourth- or higher-dimensional 
object - provided it's not a very simple figure such as a hypercyl-
inder passing through three dimensions along its axis - will wildly 
alter its geometry as we witness it passing through our universe. If 
aliens were systematically reported as shape-changers, I could 
at least see how Mack might pursue the notion of a higher-
dimensional origin. (Another problem is trying to understand 
what a genetic cross between a three-dimensional and a four-
dimensional being means. Are the offspring from the 3½ 
dimension?) 
173 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
What Mack really means when he talks about beings from other 
dimensions is that, despite his patients' occasional descriptions of 
their experiences as dreams and hallucinations, he hasn't the 
foggiest notion of what they are. But, tellingly, when he tries to 
describe them, he reaches for physics and mathematics. He wants 
it both ways - the language and credibility of science, but without 
being bound by its method and rules. He seems not to realize that 
the credibility is a consequence of the method. 
The main challenge posed by Mack's cases is the old one of 
how to teach critical thinking more broadly and more deeply in 
a society - conceivably even including Harvard professors of 
psychiatry - awash in gullibility. The idea that critical thinking 
is the latest western fad is silly. If you're buying a used car in 
Singapore or Bangkok, or a used chariot in ancient Susa or 
Rome, the same precautions will be useful as in Cambridge, 
Massachusetts. 
When you buy a used car, you might very much want to believe 
what the salesman is saying: 'So much car for so little money!' 
And anyway, it takes work to be sceptical; you have to know 
something about cars, and it's unpleasant to make the salesman 
angry at you. Despite all that, though, you recognize that the 
salesman might have a motive to shade the truth, and you've 
heard of other people in similar situations being taken. So you 
kick the tyres, look under the hood, go for a test drive, ask 
searching questions. You might even bring along a mechanically 
inclined friend. You know that some scepticism is required and 
you understand why. There is usually at least a small degree of 
hostile confrontation involved in the purchase of a used car and 
nobody claims it's an especially cheering experience. But if you 
don't exercise some minimal scepticism, if you have an absolutely 
untrammelled gullibility, there's a price you'll have to pay later. 
Then you'll wish you had made a small investment of scepticism 
early on. 
Many homes in America now have moderately sophisticated 
burglar alarm systems, including infrared sensors and cameras 
triggered by motion. An authentic videotape, with time and date 
denoted, showing an alien incursion - especially as they slip 
through the walls - might be very good evidence. If millions of 
174 


The Dragon in My Garage 
Americans have been abducted, isn't it strange that not one lives 
in such a home? 
Some women, so the story goes, are impregnated by aliens or 
alien sperm; the foetuses are then removed by the aliens. Vast 
numbers of such cases are alleged. Isn't it odd that nothing 
anomalous has ever been seen in routine sonograms of such 
foetuses, or in amniocentesis, and that there has never been a 
miscarriage producing an alien hybrid? Or are medical personnel 
so doltish that they idly glance at the half-human, half-alien foetus 
and move on to the next patient? An epidemic of missing foetuses 
is something that would surely cause a stir among gynaecologists, 
midwives, obstetrical nurses, especially in an age of heightened 
feminist awareness. But not a single medical record has been 
produced substantiating such claims. 
Some UFOlogists consider it a telling point that women who 
claim to have been sexually inactive wind up pregnant, and 
attribute their state to alien impregnation. A goodly number 
appear to be teenagers. Taking their stories at face value is not the 
only option available to the serious investigator. Surely we can 
understand why, in the anguish of an unwanted pregnancy, a 
teenager living in a society flooded with accounts of alien visita-
tion might invent such a story. Here, too, there are possible 
religious antecedents. 
Some abductees say that tiny implants, perhaps metallic, were 
inserted into their bodies, high up their nostrils, for example. 
These implants, alien abduction therapists tell us, sometimes 
accidentally fall out, but 'in all but a few of the cases the artefact 
has been lost or discarded'. These abductees seem stupefyingly 
incurious. A strange object, possibly a transmitter sending tele-
metered data about the state of your body to an alien spaceship 
somewhere above the Earth, drops out of your nose; you idly 
examine it and then throw it in the garbage. Something like this is 
true, we are told, of the majority of abduction cases. 
A few such 'implants' have been produced and examined by 
experts. None has been confirmed as of unearthly manufacture. 
No components are made of unusual isotopes, despite the fact that 
other stars and other worlds are known to be constituted of 
different isotopic proportions from the Earth. There are no metals 
175 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
from the transuranic 'island of stability', where physicists think 
there should be a new family of non-radioactive chemical ele-
ments unknown on Earth. 
What abduction enthusiasts considered the best case was that of 
Richard Price, who claims that aliens abducted him when he was 
eight years old and implanted a small artefact in his penis. A 
quarter century later a physician confirmed a 'foreign body' 
embedded there. After eight more years, it fell out. Roughly a 
millimetre in diameter and four millimetres long, it was carefully 
examined by scientists from MIT and Massachusetts General 
Hospital. Their conclusion? Collagen formed by the body at sites 
of inflammation plus cotton fibres from Price's underpants. 
On 28 August 1995, television stations owned by Rupert Murdoch 
ran what was purported to be an autopsy of a dead alien, shot on 
16-millimetre film. Masked pathologists in vintage radiation-
protection suits (with rectangular glass windows to see out of) cut up 
a large-eyed 12-fingered figure and examined the internal organs. 
While the film was sometimes out of focus, and the view of the 
cadaver often blocked by the humans crowding around it, some 
viewers found the effect chilling. The Times of London, also owned 
by Murdoch, didn't know what to make of it, although it did quote 
one pathologist who thought the autopsy performed with unseemly 
and unrealistic haste (ideal, though, for television viewing). It was 
said to have been shot in New Mexico in 1947 by a participant, now 
in his eighties, who wished to remain anonymous. What appeared to 
be the clincher was the announcement that the leader of the film (its 
first few feet) contained coded information that Kodak, the manu-
facturer, dated to 1947. However, it turns out that the full film 
magazine was not presented to Kodak, just the cut leader. For all we 
know, the leader could have been cut from a 1947 newsreel, 
abundantly archived in America, and the 'autopsy' staged and filmed 
separately and recently. There's a dragon footprint all right - but a 
fakable one. If this is a hoax, as I think likely, it requires not much 
more cleverness than crop circles and the MJ-12 document. 
In none of these stories is there anything strongly suggestive of 
extraterrestrial origin. There is certainly no retrieval of cunning 
machinery far beyond current technology. No abductee has 
filched a page from the captain's logbook, or an examining 
176 


The Dragon in My Garage 
instrument, or taken an authentic photograph of the interior of 
the ship, or come back with detailed and verifiable scientific 
information not hitherto available on Earth. Why not? These 
failures must tell us something. 
Since the middle of the twentieth century, we've been assured 
by proponents of the extraterrestrial hypothesis that physical 
evidence - not star maps remembered from years ago, not scars, 
not disturbed soil, but real alien technology - was in hand. The 
analysis would be released momentarily. These claims go back to 
the earliest crashed saucer scam of Newton and GeBauer. Now 
it's decades later and we're still waiting. Where are the articles 
published in the refereed scientific literature, in the metallurgical 
and ceramics journals, in publications of the Institute of Electrical 
and Electronic Engineers, in Science or Nature? 
Such a discovery would be momentous. If there were real 
artefacts, physicists and chemists would be fighting for the privi-
lege of discovering that there are aliens among us who use, say, 
unknown alloys, or materials of extraordinary tensile strength or 
ductility or conductivity. The practical implications of such a 
finding, never mind the confirmation of an alien invasion, would 
be immense. Discoveries like this are what scientists live for. 
Their absence must tell us something. 
Keeping an open mind is a virtue - but, as the space engineer 
James Oberg once said, not so open that your brains fall out. Of 
course we must be willing to change our minds when warranted by 
new evidence. But the evidence must be strong. Not all claims to 
knowledge have equal merit. The standard of evidence in most of 
the alien abduction cases is roughly what is found in cases of the 
apparition of the Virgin Mary in medieval Spain. 
The pioneering psychoanalyst, Carl Gustav Jung, had much 
that was sensible to say on issues of this sort. He explicitly argued 
that UFOs were a kind of projection of the unconscious mind. In a 
related discussion of regression and what today is called 'channel-
ling', he wrote 
One can very well . . . take it simply as a report of psycho-
logical facts or a continuous series of communications from 
177 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
the unconscious . . . They have this in common with dreams; 
for dreams, too, are statements about the unconscious . . . The 
present state of affairs gives us reason enough to wait quietly 
until more impressive physical phenomena put in an appear-
ance. If, after making allowance for conscious and unconscious 
falsification, self-deception, prejudice, etc., we should still find 
something positive behind them, then the exact sciences will 
surely conquer this field by experiment and verification, as has 
happened in every other realm of human experience. 
Of those who accept such testimony at face value, he remarked 
These people are lacking not only in criticism but in the most 
elementary knowledge of psychology. At bottom they do not 
want to be taught any better, but merely to go on believing -
surely the naivest of presumptions in view of our human failings. 
Perhaps some day there will be a UFO or alien abduction case that 
is well attested, accompanied by compelling physical evidence, 
and explicable only in terms of extraterrestrial visitation. It's hard 
to think of a more important discovery. So far, though, there have 
been no such cases, nothing that comes close. So far, the invisible 
dragon has left no unfakable footprints. 
Which, then, is more likely: that we're undergoing a massive 
but generally overlooked invasion by alien sexual abusers, or that 
people are experiencing some unfamiliar internal mental state 
they do not understand? Admittedly, we're very ignorant both 
about extraterrestrial beings, if any, and about human psychol-
ogy. But if these really were the only two alternatives, which one 
would you pick? 
And if the alien abduction accounts are mainly about brain 
physiology, hallucinations, distorted memories of childhood, and 
hoaxing, don't we have before us a matter of supreme importance, 
touching on our limitations, the ease with which we can be misled 
and manipulated, the fashioning of our beliefs, and perhaps even 
the origins of our religions? There is genuine scientific paydirt in 
UFOs and alien abductions - but it is, I think, of a distinctly 
home-grown and terrestrial character. 
178 


11 
The City of Grief 
. . . how alien, alas, are the streets of the city of grief. 
Rainer Maria Rilke, 
'The Tenth Elegy' (1923) 
A
short summary of the argument in the preceding seven 
chapters appeared in Parade magazine on 7 March 1993. I 
was struck by how many letters it evoked, how passionate were 
the responses, and how much agony is associated with this strange 
experience whatever its true explanation might be. Alien abduc-
tion accounts provide an unexpected window into the lives of 
some of our fellow citizens. Some letter writers reasoned, some 
asserted, some harangued, some were frankly perplexed, some 
were deeply troubled. 
The article was also widely misunderstood. A television talk-
show host, Geraldo Rivera, held up a copy of Parade and 
announced I thought we were being visited. A Washington Post 
video cassette reviewer quoted me as saying there's an abduction 
every few seconds, missing the ironical tone and the following 
sentence ('It's surprising more of the neighbours haven't 
noticed'). My description (Chapter 6) of on rare occasions seem-
ing to hear the voices of my dead parents - what I described as 'a 
lucid recollection' - were keynoted by Raymond Moody, in the 
New Age Journal and in the Introduction of his book Reunions, as 
evidence that we 'survive' death. Dr Moody has spent his life 
179 
