THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
Sometimes I dream that I'm talking to my parents, and sud-
denly - still immersed in the dreamwork - I'm seized by the 
overpowering realization that they didn't really die, that it's all 
been some kind of horrible mistake. Why, here they are, alive and 
well, my father making wry jokes, my mother earnestly advising 
me to wear a muffler because the weather is chilly. When I wake 
up I go through an abbreviated process of mourning all over 
again. Plainly, there's something within me that's ready to believe 
in life after death. And it's not the least bit interested in whether 
there's any sober evidence for it. 
So I don't guffaw at the woman who visits her husband's grave 
and chats him up every now and then, maybe on the anniversary 
of his death. It's not hard to understand. And if I have difficulties 
with the ontological status of who she's talking to, that's all right. 
That's not what this is about. This is about humans being human. 
More than a third of American adults believe that on some level 
they've made contact with the dead. The number seems to have 
jumped by 15 per cent between 1977 and 1988. A quarter of 
Americans believe in reincarnation. 
But that doesn't mean I'd be willing to accept the pretensions of 
a 'medium', who claims to channel the spirits of the dear 
departed, when I'm aware the practice is rife with fraud. I know 
how much I want to believe that my parents have just abandoned 
the husks of their bodies, like insects or snakes moulting, and 
gone somewhere else. I understand that those very feelings might 
make me easy prey even for an unclever con, or for normal people 
unfamiliar with their unconscious minds, or for those suffering 
from a dissociative psychiatric disorder. Reluctantly, I rouse some 
reserves of scepticism. 
How is it, I ask myself, that channellers never give us verifiable 
information otherwise unavailable? Why does Alexander the 
Great never tell us about the exact location of his tomb, Fermat 
about his Last Theorem, James Wilkes Booth about the Lincoln 
assassination conspiracy, Hermann Goering about the Reichstag 
fire? Why don't Sophocles, Democritus and Aristarchus dictate 
their lost books? Don't they wish future generations to have 
access to their masterpieces? 
If some good evidence for life after death were announced, I'd 
190 


The Fine Art of Baloney Detection 
be eager to examine it; but it would have to be real, scientific data, 
not mere anecdote. As with the face on Mars and alien abduc-
tions, better the hard truth, I say, than the comforting fantasy. 
And in the final tolling it often turns out that the facts are more 
comforting than the fantasy. 
The fundamental premise of 'channelling', spiritualism, and 
other forms of necromancy is that when we die we don't. Not 
exactly. Some thinking, feeling, and remembering part of us 
continues. That whatever-it-is - a soul or spirit, neither matter nor 
energy, but something else - can, we are told, re-enter the bodies 
of human and other beings in the future, and so death loses much 
of its sting. What's more, we have an opportunity, if the spiritual-
ist or channelling contentions are true, to make contact with loved 
ones who have died. 
J.Z. Knight of the State of Washington claims to be in touch 
with a 35,000-year-old somebody called 'Ramtha'. He speaks 
English very well, using Knight's tongue, lips and vocal cords, 
producing what sounds to me to be an accent from the Indian Raj. 
Since most people know how to talk, and many - from children or 
professional actors - have a repertoire of voices at their command, 
the simplest hypothesis is that Ms Knight makes 'Ramtha' speak 
all by herself, and that she has no contact with disembodied 
entities from the Pleistocene Ice Age. If there's evidence to the 
contrary, I'd love to hear it. It would be considerably more 
impressive if Ramtha could speak by himself, without the assist-
ance of Ms Knight's mouth. Failing that, how might we test the 
claim? (The actress Shirley MacLaine attests that Ramtha was her 
brother in Atlantis, but that's another story.) 
Suppose Ramtha were available for questioning. Could we 
verify whether he is who he says he is? How does he know that he 
lived 35,000 years ago, even approximately? What calendar does 
he employ? Who is keeping track of the intervening millennia? 
Thirty-five thousand plus or minus what? What were things like 
35,000 years ago? Either Ramtha really is 35,000 years old, in 
which case we discover something about that period, or he's a 
phoney and he'll (or rather she'll) slip up. 
Where did Ramtha live? (I know he speaks English with an 
Indian accent, but where 35,000 years ago did they do that?) What 
191 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
was the climate? What did Ramtha eat? (Archaeologists know 
something about what people ate back then.) What were the 
indigenous languages and social structure? Who else did Ramtha 
live with - wife, wives, children, grandchildren? What was the life 
cycle, the infant mortality rate, the life expectancy? Did they have 
birth control? What clothes did they wear? How were the clothes 
manufactured? What were the most dangerous predators? Hunt-
ing and fishing implements and strategies? Weapons? Endemic 
sexism? Xenophobia and ethnocentrism? And if Ramtha came 
from the 'high civilization' of Atlantis, where are the linguistic, 
technological, historical and other details? What was their writing 
like? Tell us. Instead, all we are offered are banal homilies. 
Here, to take another example, is a set of information chan-
nelled not from an ancient dead person, but from unknown 
non-human entities who make crop circles, as recorded by the 
journalist Jim Schnabel: 
We are so anxious at this sinful nation spreading lies about us. 
We do not come in machines, we do not land on your earth in 
machines . . . We come like the wind. We are Life Force. 
Life Force from the ground . . . Come here . . . We are but a 
breath away . . . a breath away . . . we are not a million 
miles away . . . a Life Force that is larger than the energies in 
your body. But we meet at a higher level of life . . . We need 
no name. We are parallel to your world, alongside your 
world . . . The walls are broken. Two men will rise from the 
past . . . the great bear . . . the world will be at peace. 
People pay attention to these puerile marvels mainly because they 
promise something like old-time religion, but especially life after 
death, even life eternal. 
A very different prospect for something like eternal life was 
once proposed by the versatile British scientist J.B.S. Haldane, 
who was, among many other things, one of the founders of 
population genetics. Haldane imagined a far future when the stars 
have darkened and space is mainly filled with a cold, thin gas. 
Nevertheless, if we wait long enough statistical fluctuations in the 
density of this gas will occur. Over immense periods of time the 
192 


The Fine Art of Baloney Detection 
fluctuations will be sufficient to reconstitute a Universe something 
like our own. If the Universe is infinitely old, there will be an 
infinite number of such reconstitutions, Haldane pointed out. 
So in an infinitely old universe with an infinite number of 
appearances of galaxies, stars, planets and life, an identical Earth 
must reappear on which you and all your loved ones will be 
reunited. I'll be able to see my parents again and introduce them 
to the grandchildren they never knew. And all this will happen not 
once, but an infinite number of times. 
But in this reflection I have underestimated what infinity 
means. In Haldane's picture, there will be universes, indeed an 
infinite number of them, in which our brains will have full 
recollection of many previous rounds. Satisfaction is at hand -
tempered, though, by the thought of all those other universes 
which will also come into existence (again, not once but an infinite 
number of times) with tragedies and horrors vastly outstripping 
anything I've experienced this turn. 
The Consolation of Haldane depends, though, on what kind of 
universe we live in, and maybe on such arcana as whether there's 
enough matter eventually to reverse the expansion of the uni-
verse, and the character of vacuum fluctuations. Those with a 
deep longing for life after death might, it seems, devote them-
selves to cosmology, quantum gravity, elementary particle phys-
ics, and, especially, transfinite arithmetic. 
Clement of Alexandria, a Father of the early Church, in his 
Exhortations to the Greeks (written around the year 190) dis-
missed pagan beliefs in words that might today seem a little ironic: 
Far indeed are we from allowing grown men to listen to such 
tales. Even to our own children, when they are crying their 
heart out, as the saying goes, we are not in the habit of telling 
fabulous stories to soothe them. 
In our time we have less severe standards. We tell children about 
Santa Claus, the Easter Bunny and the Tooth Fairy for reasons we 
think emotionally sound, but then disabuse them of these myths 
before they're grown. Why retract? Because their well-being as 
193 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
adults depends on them knowing the world as it really is. We worry, 
and for good reason, about adults who still believe in Santa Claus. 
On doctrinaire religions, 'Men dare not avow, even to their own 
hearts', wrote the philosopher David Hume, 
the doubts which they entertain on such subjects. They make 
a merit of implicit faith; and disguise to themselves their real 
infidelity, by the strongest asseverations and the most posi-
tive bigotry. 
This infidelity has profound moral consequences, as the American 
revolutionary Tom Paine wrote in The Age of Reason: 
Infidelity does not consist in believing, or in disbelieving; it 
consists in professing to believe what one does not believe. It 
is impossible to calculate the moral mischief, if I may so 
express it, that mental lying has produced in society. When 
man has so far corrupted and prostituted the chastity of his 
mind, as to subscribe his professional belief to things he does 
not believe, he has prepared himself for the commission of 
every other crime. 
T.H. Huxley's formulation was 
The foundation of morality is to . . . give up pretending to 
believe that for which there is no evidence, and repeating 
unintelligible propositions about things beyond the possibili-
ties of knowledge. 
Clement, Hume, Paine and Huxley were all talking about reli-
gion. But much of what they wrote has more general applications 
- for example to the pervasive background importunings of our 
commercial civilization: there is a class of aspirin commercials in 
which actors pretending to be doctors reveal the competing 
product to have only so much of the painkilling ingredient that 
doctors recommend most - they don't tell you what the mysterious 
ingredient is. Whereas their product has a dramatically larger 
amount (1.2 to 2 times more per tablet). So buy their product. But 
194 


The Fine Art of Baloney Detection 
why not just take two of the competing tablets? Or consider the 
analgesic that works better than the 'regular-strength' product of 
the competition. Why not then take the 'extra-strength' competitive 
product? And of course they do not tell us of the more than a 
thousand deaths each year in the United States from the use of 
aspirin, or the apparent 5,000 annual cases of kidney failure from 
the use of acetaminophen, of which the best-selling brand is 
Tylenol. (This, however, may represent a case of correlation without 
causation.) Or who cares which breakfast cereal has more vitamins 
when we can take a vitamin pill with breakfast? Likewise, why 
should it matter whether an antacid contains calcium if the calcium 
is for nutrition and irrelevant for gastritis? Commercial culture is 
full of similar misdirections and evasions at the expense of the 
consumer. You're not supposed to ask. Don't think. Buy. 
Paid product endorsements, especially by real or purported 
experts, constitute a steady rainfall of deception. They betray 
contempt for the intelligence of their customers. They introduce an 
insidious corruption of popular attitudes about scientific objectiv-
ity. Today there are even commercials in which real scientists, some 
of considerable distinction, shill for corporations. They teach that 
scientists too will lie for money. As Tom Paine warned, inuring us to 
lies lays the groundwork for many other evils. 
I have in front of me as I write the programme of one of the 
annual Whole Life Expos, New Age expositions held in San 
Francisco. Typically, tens of thousands of people attend. Highly 
questionable experts tout highly questionable products. Here are 
some of the presentations: 'How Trapped Blood Proteins Produce 
Pain and Suffering'. 'Crystals, Are They Talismans or Stones?' (I 
have an opinion myself.) It continues: 'As a crystal focuses sound 
and light waves for radio and television' - this is a vapid misunder-
standing of how radio and television work - 'so may it amplify 
spiritual vibrations for the attuned human'. Or here's one: 'Return 
of the Goddess, a Presentational Ritual'. Another: 'Synchronicity, 
the Recognition Experience'. That one is given by 'Brother 
Charles'. Or, on the next page, 'You, Saint-Germain, and Healing 
Through the Violet Flame'. It goes on and on, with plenty of ads 
about 'opportunities' - running the short gamut from the dubious 
to the spurious - that are available at the Whole Life Expo. 
195 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
Distraught cancer victims make pilgrimages to the Philippines, 
where 'psychic surgeons', having palmed bits of chicken liver or 
goat heart, pretend to reach into the patient's innards and 
withdraw the diseased tissue, which is then triumphantly dis-
played. Leaders of western democracies regularly consult astrolo-
gers and mystics before making decisions of state. Under public 
pressure for results, police with an unsolved murder or a missing 
body on their hands consult ESP 'experts' (who never guess better 
than expected by common sense, but the police, the ESPers say, 
keep calling). A clairvoyance gap with adversary nations is 
announced, and the Central Intelligence Agency, under Congres-
sional prodding, spends tax money to find out whether submarines 
in the ocean depths can be located by thinking hard at them. A 
'psychic', using pendulums over maps and dowsing rods in air-
planes, purports to find new mineral deposits; an Australian 
mining company pays him top dollars up front, none of it 
returnable in the event of failure, and a share in the exploitation 
of ores in the event of success. Nothing is discovered. Statues of 
Jesus or murals of Mary are spotted with moisture, and thousands 
of kind-hearted people convince themselves that they have wit-
nessed a miracle. 
These are all cases of proved or presumptive baloney. A 
deception arises, sometimes innocently but collaboratively, some-
times with cynical premeditation. Usually the victim is caught up 
in a powerful emotion - wonder, fear, greed, grief. Credulous 
acceptance of baloney can cost you money; that's what P.T. 
Barnum meant when he said, 'There's a sucker born every 
minute'. But it can be much more dangerous than that, and when 
governments and societies lose the capacity for critical thinking, 
the results can be catastrophic, however sympathetic we may be to 
those who have bought the baloney. 
In science we may start with experimental results, data, obser-
vations, measurements, 'facts'. We invent, if we can, a rich array 
of possible explanations and systematically confront each explana-
tion with the facts. In the course of their training, scientists are 
equipped with a baloney detection kit. The kit is brought out as a 
matter of course whenever new ideas are offered for considera-
tion. If the new idea survives examination by the tools in our kit, 
196 


The Fine Art of Baloney Detection 
we grant it warm, although tentative, acceptance. If you're so 
inclined, if you don't want to buy baloney even when it's 
reassuring to do so, there are precautions that can be taken; 
there's a tried-and-true, consumer-tested method. 
What's in the kit? Tools for sceptical thinking. 
What sceptical thinking boils down to is the means to construct, 
and to understand, a reasoned argument and, especially impor-
tant, to recognize a fallacious or fraudulent argument. The 
question is not whether we like the conclusion that emerges out of 
a train of reasoning, but whether the conclusion follows from the 
premises or starting point and whether that premise is true. 
Among the tools: 
• Wherever possible there must be independent confirmation of 
the 'facts'. 
• Encourage substantive debate on the evidence by knowledge-
able proponents of all points of view. 
• Arguments from authority carry little weight - 'authorities' 
have made mistakes in the past. They will do so again in the 
future. Perhaps a better way to say it is that in science there are 
no authorities; at most, there are experts. 
• Spin more than one hypothesis. If there's something to be 
explained, think of all the different ways in which it could be 
explained. Then think of tests by which you might systemati-
cally disprove each of the alternatives. What survives, the 
hypothesis that resists disproof in this Darwinian selection 
among 'multiple working hypotheses', has a much better 
chance of being the right answer than if you had simply run with 
the first idea that caught your fancy.* 
• Try not to get overly attached to a hypothesis just because it's 
yours. It's only a way-station in the pursuit of knowledge. Ask 
yourself why you like the idea. Compare it fairly with the 
* This is a problem that affects jury trials. Retrospective studies show that some 
jurors make up their minds very early - perhaps during opening arguments -
and then retain the evidence that seems to support their initial impressions and 
reject the contrary evidence. The method of alternative working hypotheses is 
not running in their heads. 
197 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
alternatives. See if you can find reasons for rejecting it. If you 
don't, others will. 
• Quantify. If whatever it is you're explaining has some measure, 
some numerical quantity attached to it, you'll be much better 
able to discriminate among competing hypotheses. What is 
vague and qualitative is open to many explanations. Of course 
there are truths to be sought in the many qualitative issues we 
are obliged to confront, but finding them is more challenging. 
• If there's a chain of argument, every link in the chain must work 
(including the premise) - not just most of them. 
• Occam's Razor. This convenient rule-of-thumb urges us when 
faced with two hypotheses that explain the data equally well to 
choose the simpler. 
• Always ask whether the hypothesis can be, at least in principle, 
falsified. Propositions that are untestable, unfalsifiable are not 
worth much. Consider the grand idea that our Universe and 
everything in it is just an elementary particle - an electron, say 
- in a much bigger Cosmos. But if we can never acquire 
information from outside our Universe, is not the idea incapa-
ble of disproof? You must be able to check assertions out. 
Inveterate sceptics must be given the chance to follow your 
reasoning, to duplicate your experiments and see if they get the 
same result. 
The reliance on carefully designed and controlled experiments is 
key, as I tried to stress earlier. We will not learn much from mere 
contemplation. It is tempting to rest content with the first 
candidate explanation we can think of. One is much better than 
none. But what happens if we can invent several? How do we 
decide among them? We don't. We let experiment do it. Francis 
Bacon provided a classic reason: 
Argumentation cannot suffice for the discovery of new work, 
since the subtlety of Nature is greater many times than the 
subtlety of argument. 
Control experiments are essential. If, for example, a new medi-
cine is alleged to cure a disease 20 per cent of the time, we must 
198 


The Fine Art of Baloney Detection 
make sure that a control population, taking a dummy sugar pill 
which as far as the subjects know might be the new drug, does not 
also experience spontaneous remission of the disease 20 per cent 
of the time. 
Variables must be separated. Suppose you're seasick, and given 
both an acupressure bracelet and 50 milligrams of meclizine. You 
find the unpleasantness vanishes. What did it - the bracelet or the 
pill? You can tell only if you take the one without the other next 
time you're seasick. Now imagine that you're not so dedicated to 
science as to be willing to be seasick. Then you won't separate the 
variables. You'll take both remedies again. You've achieved the 
desired practical result; further knowledge, you might say, is not 
worth the discomfort of attaining it. 
Often the experiment must be done 'double-blind', so that 
those hoping for a certain finding are not in the potentially 
compromising position of evaluating the results. In testing a 
new medicine, for example, you might want the physicians who 
determine which patients' symptoms are relieved not to know 
which patients have been given the new drug. The knowledge 
might influence their decision, even if only unconsciously. 
Instead the list of those who experienced remission of symp-
toms can be compared with the list of those who got the new 
drug, each independently ascertained. Then you can determine 
what correlation exists. Or in conducting a police line-up or 
photo identification, the officer in charge should not know who 
the prime suspect is, so as not consciously or unconsciously to 
influence the witness. 
In addition to teaching us what to do when evaluating a claim to 
knowledge, any good baloney detection kit must also teach us 
what not to do. It helps us recognize the most common and 
perilous fallacies of logic and rhetoric. Many good examples can 
be found in religion and politics, because their practitioners are so 
often obliged to justify two contradictory propositions. Among 
these fallacies are: 
• Ad hominem - Latin for 'to the man', attacking the arguer and 
not the argument (e.g., the Reverend Dr Smith is a known 
199 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
Biblical fundamentalist, so her objections to evolution need not 
be taken seriously). 
• Argument from authority (e.g., President Richard Nixon 
should be re-elected because he has a secret plan to end the war 
in Southeast Asia - but because it was secret, there was no way 
for the electorate to evaluate it on its merits; the argument 
amounted to trusting him because he was President: a mistake, 
as it turned out). 
• Argument from adverse consequences (e.g., a God meting out 
punishment and reward must exist, because if He didn't, society 
would be much more lawless and dangerous - perhaps even 
ungovernable.* Or: the defendant in a widely publicized murder 
trial must be found guilty; otherwise, it will be an encouragement 
for other men to murder their wives). 
• Appeal to ignorance - the claim that whatever has not been 
proved false must be true, and vice versa (e.g., there is no 
compelling evidence that UFOs are not visiting the Earth; 
therefore UFOs exist - and there is intelligent life elsewhere in the 
Universe. Or: there may be seventy kazillion other worlds, but 
not one is known to have the moral advancement of the Earth, so 
we're still central to the Universe). This impatience with ambigu-
ity can be criticized in the phrase: absence of evidence is not 
evidence of absence. 
• Special pleading, often to rescue a proposition in deep rhetori-
cal trouble (e.g., how can a merciful God condemn future 
generations to unending torment because, against orders, one 
woman induced one man to eat an apple? Special plead: you 
don't understand the subtle Doctrine of Free Will. Or: how can 
there be an equally godlike Father, Son and Holy Ghost in the 
same Person? Special plead: you don't understand the Divine 
Mystery of the Trinity. Or: how could God permit the followers 
of Judaism, Christianity and Islam - each in their own way 
* A more cynical formulation by the Roman historian Polybius: Since the masses 
of the people are inconstant, full of unruly desires, passionate, and reckless of 
consequences, they must be filled with fears to keep them in order. The 
ancients did well, therefore, to invent gods, and the belief in punishment after 
death. 
200 


The Fine Art of Baloney Detection 
enjoined to heroic measures of loving kindness and compassion - to 
have perpetrated so much cruelty for so long? Special plead: you 
don't understand Free Will again. And anyway, God moves in 
mysterious ways). 
• Begging the question, also called assuming the answer (e.g., we 
must institute the death penalty to discourage violent crime. But 
does the violent crime rate in fact fall when the death penalty is 
imposed? Or: the stock market fell yesterday because of a 
technical adjustment and profit-taking by investors. But is there 
any independent evidence for the causal role of 'adjustment* 
and profit-taking; have we learned anything at all from this 
purported explanation?). 
• Observational selection, also called the enumeration of favourable 
circumstances, or as the philosopher Francis Bacon described it, 
counting the hits and forgetting the misses* (e.g., a state boasts of 
the Presidents it has produced, but is silent on its serial killers). 
• Statistics of small numbers - a close relative of observational 
selection (e.g., 'they say 1 out of 5 people is Chinese. How is this 
possible? I know hundreds of people, and none of them is Chinese. 
Yours truly.' Or. 'I've thrown three sevens in a row. Tonight I can't 
lose.'). 
* My favourite example is this story, told about the Italian physicist Enrico Fermi, 
newly arrived on American shores, enlisted in the Manhattan nuclear weapons 
project, and brought face-to-face in the midst of World War Two with US flag 
officers: 
So-and-so is a great general, he was told. 
'What is the definition of a great general?' Fermi characteristically asked. 
I guess it's a general who's won many consecutive battles.' 
'How many?' 
After some back and forth, they settled on five. 
'What fraction of American generals are great?' 
After some more back and forth, they settled on a few per cent. 
But imagine, Fermi rejoined, that there is no such thing as a great general, that 
all armies are equally matched, and that winning a battle is purely a matter of 
chance. Then the chance of winning one battle is one out of two, or 1/2; two 
battles 1/4, three 1/8, four 1/16, and five consecutive battles 1/32, which is about 
three per cent. You would expect a few per cent of American generals to win five 
consecutive battles, purely by chance. Now, has any of them won ten consecutive 
battles...? 
201 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
• Misunderstanding of the nature of statistics (e.g., President 
Dwight Eisenhower expressing astonishment and alarm on 
discovering that fully half of all Americans have below average 
intelligence). 
• Inconsistency (e.g., prudently plan for the worst of which a 
potential military adversary is capable, but thriftily ignore scien-
tific projections on environmental dangers because they're not 
'proved'. Or: attribute the declining life expectancy in the former 
Soviet Union to the failures of communism many years ago, but 
never attribute the high infant mortality rate in the United States 
(now highest in the major industrial nations) to the failures of 
capitalism. Or: consider it reasonable for the Universe to 
continue to exist forever into the future, but judge absurd the 
possibility that it has infinite duration into the past). 
• Non sequitur - Latin for 'it doesn't follow' (e.g., our nation will 
prevail because God is great. But nearly every nation pretends 
this to be true; the German formulation was 'Gott mit uns'). 
Often those falling into the non sequitur fallacy have simply 
failed to recognize alternative possibilities. 
• Post hoc, ergo propter hoc - Latin for 'it happened after, so it 
was caused by' (e.g., Jamie Cardinal Sin, Archbishop of 
Manila: 'I know of... a 26-year-old who looks 60 because she 
takes [contraceptive] pills.' Or: before women got the vote, there 
were no nuclear weapons). 
• Meaningless question (e.g., What happens when an irresistible 
force meets an immovable object? But if there is such a thing as 
an irresistible force there can be no immovable objects, and 
vice versa). 
• Excluded middle, or false dichotomy - considering only the two 
extremes in a continuum of intermediate possibilities (e.g., 
'sure, take his side; my husband's perfect; I'm always wrong.' 
Or: 'either you love your country or you hate it.' Or: 'if you're 
not part of the solution, you're part of the problem'). 
• Short-term v. long-term - a subset of the excluded middle, but 
so important I've pulled it out for special attention (e.g., we 
can't afford programmes to feed malnourished children and 
educate preschool kids. We need to urgently deal with crime on 
the streets. Or: why explore space or pursue fundamental science 
202 


The Fine Art of Baloney Detection 
when we have so huge a budget deficit?). 
• Slippery slope, related to excluded middle (e.g., if we allow 
abortion in the first weeks of pregnancy, it will be impossible to 
prevent the killing of a full-term infant. Or, conversely: if the 
state prohibits abortion even in the ninth month, it will soon be 
telling us what to do with our bodies around the time of 
conception). 
• Confusion of correlation and causation (e.g., a survey shows 
that more college graduates are homosexual than those with 
lesser education; therefore education makes people gay. Or: 
Andean earthquakes are correlated with closest approaches of 
the planet Uranus; therefore - despite the absence of any such 
correlation for the nearer, more massive planet Jupiter - the 
latter causes the former.* 
• Straw man - caricaturing a position to make it easier to attack 
(e.g., scientists suppose that living things simply fell together by 
chance - a formulation that wilfully ignores the central Darwin-
ian insight, that Nature ratchets up by saving what works and 
discarding what doesn't. Or - this is also a short-term/long-term 
fallacy - environmentalists care more for snail darters and 
spotted owls than they do for people). 
• Suppressed evidence, or half-truths (e.g., an amazingly accurate 
and widely quoted 'prophecy' of the assassination attempt on 
President Reagan is shown on television; but - an important detail 
- was it recorded before or after the event? Or: these government 
abuses demand revolution, even if you can't make an omelette 
without breaking some eggs. Yes, but is this likely to be a 
revolution in which far more people are killed than under the 
* Or: children who watch violent TV programmes tend to be more violent when 
they grow up. But did the TV cause the violence, or do violent children 
preferentially enjoy watching violent programmes? Very likely both are true. 
Commercial defenders of TV violence argue that anyone can distinguish 
between television and reality. But Saturday morning children's programmes 
now average 25 acts of violence per hour. At the very least this desensitizes 
young children to aggression and random cruelty. And if impressionable adults 
can have false memories implanted in their brains, what are we implanting in 
our children when we expose them to some 100,000 acts of violence before they 
graduate from elementary school? 
203 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
previous regime? What does the experience of other revolutions 
suggest? Are all possible revolutions against oppressive regimes 
desirable and in the interests of the people?). 
• Weasel words (e.g., the separation of powers of the US 
Constitution specifies that the United States may not conduct a 
war without a declaration by Congress. On the other hand, 
Presidents are given control of foreign policy and the conduct 
of wars, which are potentially powerful tools for getting them-
selves re-elected. Presidents of either political party may there-
fore be tempted to arrange wars while waving the flag and 
calling the wars something else - 'police actions', 'armed 
incursions', 'protective reaction strikes', 'pacification', 'safe-
guarding American interests', and a wide variety of 'opera-
tions', such as 'Operation Just Cause'. Euphemisms for war are 
one of a broad class of reinventions of language for political 
purposes. Talleyrand said, 'An important art of politicians is to 
find new names for institutions which under old names have 
become odious to the public'). 
Knowing the existence of such logical and rhetorical fallacies 
rounds out our toolkit. Like all tools, the baloney detection kit 
can be misused, applied out of context, or even employed as a rote 
alternative to thinking. But applied judiciously, it can make all the 
difference in the world, not least in evaluating our own arguments 
before we present them to others. 
The American tobacco industry grosses some $50 billion per year. 
There is a statistical correlation between smoking and cancer, the 
tobacco industry admits, but not, they say, a causal relation. A 
logical fallacy, they imply, is being committed. What might this 
mean? Maybe people with hereditary propensities for cancer also 
have hereditary propensities to take addictive drugs - so cancer 
and smoking might be correlated, but the cancer would not be 
caused by the smoking. Increasingly far-fetched connections of 
this sort can be contrived. This is exactly one of the reasons 
science insists on control experiments. 
Suppose you paint the backs of large numbers of mice with 
cigarette tar, and also follow the health of large numbers of nearly 
204 


The Fine Art of Baloney Detection 
identical mice that have not been painted. If the former get 
cancer and the latter do not, you can be pretty sure that the 
correlation is causal. Inhale tobacco smoke, and the chance of 
getting cancer goes up; don't inhale, and the rate stays at the 
background level. Likewise for emphysema, bronchitis and 
cardiovascular diseases. 
When the first work was published in the scientific literature in 
1953 showing that the substances in cigarette smoke when painted 
on the backs of rodents produce malignancies, the response of the 
six major tobacco companies was to initiate a public relations 
campaign to impugn the research, sponsored by the Sloan Ketter-
ing Foundation. This is similar to what the Du Pont Corporation 
did when the first research was published in 1974 showing that 
their Freon product attacks the protective ozone layer. There are 
many other examples. 
You might think that before they denounce unwelcome 
research findings, major corporations would devote their consid-
erable resources to checking out the safety of the products they 
propose to manufacture. And if they missed something, if inde-
pendent scientists suggest a hazard, why would the companies 
protest? Would they rather kill people than lose profits? If, in an 
uncertain world, an error must be made, shouldn't it be biased 
toward protecting customers and the public? And, incidentally, 
what do these cases say about the ability of the free enterprise 
system to police itself? Aren't these instances where government 
intrusion is in the public interest? 
A 1971 internal report of the Brown and Williamson Tobacco 
Corporation lists as a corporate objective 'to set aside in the minds 
of millions the false conviction that cigarette smoking causes lung 
cancer and other diseases; a conviction based on fanatical assump-
tions, fallacious rumours, unsupported claims and the unscientific 
statements and conjectures of publicity-seeking opportunists'. 
They complain of 
the incredible, unprecedented and nefarious attack against 
the cigarette, constituting the greatest libel and slander 
ever perpetrated against any product in the history of free 
enterprise; a criminal libel of such major proportions and 
205 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
implications that one wonders how such a crusade of 
calumny can be reconciled under the Constitution can be so 
flouted and violated [sic]. 
This rhetoric is only slightly more inflamed than what the tobacco 
industry has from time to time uttered for public consumption. 
There are many brands of cigarettes that advertise low 'tar' (ten 
milligrams or less per cigarette). Why is this a virtue? Because it is 
the refractory tars in which polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons and 
some other carcinogens are concentrated. Aren't the low tar ads a 
tacit admission by the tobacco companies that cigarettes indeed 
cause cancer? 
Healthy Buildings International is a for-profit organization, 
recipient of millions of dollars over the years from the tobacco 
industry. It performs research on second-hand smoke, and testi-
fies for the tobacco companies. In 1994, three of its technicians 
complained that senior executives had faked data on inhalable 
cigarette particles in the air. In every case, the invented or 
'corrected' data made tobacco smoke seem safer than the techni-
cians' measurements had indicated. Do corporate research 
departments or outside research contractors ever find a product to 
be more dangerous than the tobacco corporation has publicly 
declared? If they do, is their employment continued? 
Tobacco is addictive; by many criteria more so than heroin and 
cocaine. There was a reason people would, as the 1940s ad put it, 
'walk a mile for a Camel'. More people have died of tobacco than 
in all of World War II. According to the World Health Organiza-
tion, smoking kills three million people every year worldwide. 
This will rise to ten million annual deaths by 2020, in part because 
of a massive advertising campaign to portray smoking as advanced 
and fashionable to young women in the developing world. Part of 
the success of the tobacco industry in purveying this brew of 
addictive poisons can be attributed to widespread unfamiliarity 
with baloney detection, critical thinking and scientific method. 
Gullibility kills. 
206 


13 
Obsessed with Reality 
A shipowner was about to send to sea an emigrant ship. He 
knew that she was old, and not overwell built at the first; 
that she had seen many seas and climes, and often had 
needed repairs. Doubts had been suggested to him that 
possibly she was not seaworthy. These doubts preyed upon 
his mind, and made him unhappy; he thought that perhaps 
he ought to have her thoroughly overhauled and refitted, 
even though this should put him to great expense. Before 
the ship sailed, however, he succeeded in overcoming these 
melancholy reflections. He said to himself that she had gone 
safely through so many voyages and weathered so many 
storms, that it was idle to suppose that she would not come 
safely home from this trip also. He would put his trust in 
Providence, which could hardly fail to protect all these 
unhappy families that were leaving their fatherland to seek 
for better times elsewhere. He would dismiss from his mind 
all ungenerous suspicions about the honesty of builders and 
contractors. In such ways he acquired a sincere and 
comfortable conviction that his vessel was thoroughly safe 
and seaworthy; he watched her departure with a light heart, 
and benevolent wishes for the success of the exiles in their 
strange new home that was to be; and he got his insurance 
money when she went down in mid ocean and told no tales. 
What shall we say of him? Surely this, that he was verily 
207 
