THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
I can personally attest to the emotional power. But aren't 
powerful emotions a routine component of our dreams? Don't we 
sometimes awake in stark terror? Doesn't Mack, himself the 
author of a book on nightmares, know about the emotional power 
of hallucinations? Some of Mack's patients describe themselves as 
having hallucinated since childhood. Have the hypnotists and 
psychotherapists working with 'abductees' made conscientious 
attempts to steep themselves in the body of knowledge on 
hallucinations and perceptual malfunctions? Why do they believe 
these witnesses but not those who reported, with comparable 
conviction, encounters with gods, demons, saints, angels and 
fairies? And what about those who hear irresistible commands 
from a voice within? Are all deeply felt stories true? 
A scientist of my acquaintance says, 'If the aliens would only 
keep all the folks they abduct, our world would be a little saner.' 
But her judgement is too harsh. It doesn't seem to be a matter of 
sanity. It's something else. The Canadian psychologist Nicholas 
Spanos and his colleagues concluded that there are no obvious 
pathologies in those who report being abducted by UFOs. How-
ever, 
intense UFO experiences are more likely to occur in individu-
als who are disposed to esoteric beliefs in general and alien 
beliefs in particular and who interpret unusual sensory and 
imaginal experiences in terms of the alien hypothesis. Among 
UFO believers, those with stronger propensities toward 
fantasy production were particularly likely to generate such 
experiences. Moreover, such experiences were likely to be 
generated and interpreted as real events rather than imagin-
ings when they were associated with restricted sensory envi-
ronments . . . (e.g., experiences that occurred at night and in 
association with sleep). 
What a more critical mind might recognize as a hallucination or a 
dream, a more credulous mind interprets as a glimpse of an 
elusive but profound external reality. 
Some alien abduction accounts may conceivably be disguised 
144 


Therapy 
memories of rape and childhood sexual abuse, with the father, 
stepfather, uncle or mother's boyfriend represented as an alien. 
Surely it's more comforting to believe that an alien abused you 
than that it was done by someone you trusted and loved. 
Therapists who take the alien abduction stories at face value deny 
this, saying they would know if their patients were sexually 
abused. Some estimates from opinion surveys range as high as one 
in four American women and one in six American men have been 
sexually abused in childhood (although these estimates are prob-
ably too high). It would be astonishing if a significant number of 
patients who present themselves to alien abduction therapists had 
not been so abused, perhaps even a larger proportion than in the 
general population. 
Both sexual abuse therapists and alien abduction therapists 
spend months, sometimes years, encouraging their subjects to 
remember being abused. Their methods are similar, and their 
goals are in a way the same - to recover painful memories, often 
of long ago. In both cases the therapist believes the patient to be 
suffering from trauma attendant to an event so terrible that it is 
repressed. I find it striking that alien abduction therapists find so 
few cases of sexual abuse and vice versa. 
Those who have in fact been subjected to childhood sexual 
abuse or incest are, for very understandable reasons, sensitive 
about anything that seems to minimize or deny their experience. 
They are angry, and they have every right to be. In the US, at 
least one in ten women have been raped, almost two-thirds before 
the age of 18. A recent survey reports that one-sixth of all rape 
victims reported to police are under the age of 12. (And this is the 
category of rape least likely to be reported.) One-fifth of these 
girls were raped by their fathers. They have been betrayed. I want 
to be very clear about this: there are many real cases of ghoulish 
sexual predation by parents, or those acting in the role of parents. 
Compelling physical evidence - photos, for example, or diaries, or 
gonorrhoea or chlamydia in the child - have in some cases come to 
light. Abuse of children has been implicated as a major probable 
cause of social problems. According to one survey, 85 per cent of 
all violent prison inmates were abused in childhood. Two-thirds of 
all teenage mothers were raped or sexually abused as children or 
145 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
teenagers. Rape victims are ten times more likely than other 
women to use alcohol and other drugs to excess. The problem is 
real and urgent. Most of these tragic and incontestable cases of 
childhood sexual abuse, however, have been continuously remem-
bered into adulthood. There is no hidden memory to be retrieved. 
While there is better reporting today than in the past, there 
does seem to be a significant increase in cases of child abuse 
reported each year by hospitals and law enforcement authorities, 
rising in the United States ten-fold (to 1.7 million cases) between 
1967 and 1985. Alcohol and other drugs, as well as economic 
stresses, are pointed to as the 'reasons' adults are more prone to 
abuse children today than in the past. Perhaps increasing publicity 
given to contemporary cases of child abuse emboldens adults to 
remember and focus on the abuse they once suffered. 
A century ago, Sigmund Freud introduced the concept of 
repression, the forgetting of events in order to avoid intense 
psychic pain, as a coping mechanism essential for mental health. It 
seemed to emerge especially in patients diagnosed with 'hysteria', 
the symptoms of which included hallucinations and paralysis. At 
first Freud believed that behind every case of hysteria was a 
repressed instance of childhood sexual abuse. Eventually Freud 
changed his explanation to hysteria being caused by fantasies - not 
all of them unpleasant - of having been sexually abused as a child. 
The burden of guilt was shifted from parent to child. Something 
like this debate rages today. (The reason for Freud's change of 
heart is still being disputed - the explanations ranging from his 
provoking outrage among his Viennese middle-aged male peers, 
to his recognition that he was taking the stories of hysterics 
seriously.) 
Instances in which the 'memory' suddenly surfaces, especially 
at the ministrations of a psychotherapist or hypnotist, and 
where the first 'recollections' have a ghost- or dreamlike quality 
are highly questionable. Many such claims of sexual abuse 
appear to be invented. The Emory University psychologist 
Ulric Neisser says: 
There is child abuse, and there are such things as repressed 
memories. But there are also such things as false memories 
146 


Therapy 
and confabulations, and they are not rare at all. Misremem-
berings are the rule, not the exception. They occur all the 
time. They occur even in cases where the subject is absolutely 
confident - even when the memory is a seemingly unforgetta-
ble flashbulb, one of those metaphorical mental photographs. 
They are still more likely to occur in cases where suggestion is 
a lively possibility, where memories can be shaped and 
re-shaped to meet the strong interpersonal demands of a 
therapy session. And once a memory has been reconfigured 
in this way, it is very, very hard to change. 
These general principles cannot help us to decide with 
certainty where the truth lies in any individual case or claim. But 
on the average, across a large number of such claims, it is pretty 
obvious where we should place our bets. Misremembering and 
retrospective reworking of the past are a part of human nature; 
they go with the territory and they happen all the time. 
Survivors of the Nazi death camps provide the clearest imagina-
ble demonstration that even the most monstrous abuse can be 
carried continuously in human memory. Indeed, the problem 
for many Holocaust survivors has been to put some emotional 
distance between themselves and the death camps, to forget. 
But if in some alternative world of inexpressible evil they were 
forced to live in Nazi Germany - let's say a thriving post-Hitler 
nation with its ideology intact, except that it's changed its mind 
about anti-Semitism - imagine the psychological burden on 
Holocaust survivors then. Then perhaps they would be able to 
forget, because remembering would make their current lives 
unbearable. If there is such a thing as the repression and 
subsequent recall of ghastly memories, then perhaps it requires 
two conditions: (1) that the abuse actually happened, and (2) 
that the victim was required to pretend for long periods of time 
that it never happened. 
The University of California social psychologist Richard Ofshe 
explains: 
When patients are asked to explain how the memories 
returned, they report assembling fragments of images, ideas, 
147 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
feelings, and sensations into marginally coherent stories. As 
the so-called memory work stretches out for months, feelings 
become vague images, images become figures, and figures 
become known persons. Vague discomfort in certain parts of 
the body is reinterpreted as childhood rape . . . The original 
physical sensations, sometimes augmented by hypnosis, are 
then labeled 'body memories'. There is no conceivable 
mechanism by which the muscles of the body could store 
memories. If these methods fail to persuade, the therapist 
may resort to still more heavy-handed practices. Some 
patients are recruited into survivor groups in which peer 
pressure is brought to bear, and they are asked to demon-
strate politically correct solidarity by establishing themselves 
as members of a survivor subculture. 
A cautious 1993 statement by the American Psychiatric Associa-
tion accepts the possibility that some of us forget childhood abuse 
as a means of coping, but warns, 
It is not known how to distinguish, with complete accuracy, 
memories based on true events from those derived from other 
sources . . . Repeated questioning may lead individuals to 
report 'memories' of events that never occurred. It is not 
known what proportion of adults who report memories of 
sexual abuse were actually abused . . . A strong prior belief 
by the psychiatrist that sexual abuse, or other factors, are or 
are not the cause of the patient's problems is likely to 
interfere with appropriate assessment and treatment. 
On the one hand, callously to dismiss charges of horrifying sexual 
abuse can be heartless injustice. On the other hand, to tamper 
with people's memories, to infuse false stories of childhood abuse, 
to break up intact families, and even to send innocent parents to 
prison is also heartless injustice. Scepticism is essential on both 
sides. Picking our way between these two extremes can be very 
tricky. 
Early editions of the influential book by Ellen Bass and 
Laura David (The Courage to Heal: A Guide for Women 
148 


Therapy 
Survivors of Child Sexual Abuse, 1988) give illuminating advice 
to therapists: 
Believe the survivor. You must believe your client was 
sexually abused, even if she doubts it herself . . . Your client 
needs you to stay steady in the belief that she was abused. 
Joining a client in doubt would be like joining a suicidal client 
in her belief that suicide is the best way out. If a client is 
unsure that she was abused but thinks she might have been, 
work as though she was. So far, among the hundreds of 
women we've talked to and the hundreds more we've heard 
about, not one has suspected that she might have been 
abused, explored it, and determined that she wasn't. 
But Kenneth V. Lanning, Supervisory Special Agent at the 
Behavioral Science Instruction and Research Unit of the FBI 
Academy in Quantico, Virginia, a leading expert on the sexual 
victimization of children, wonders: 'Are we making up for centu-
ries of denial by now blindly accepting any allegation of child 
abuse, no matter how absurd or unlikely?' 'I don't care if it's true,' 
replies one California therapist reported by The Washington Post. 
'What actually happened is irrelevant to me . . . We all live in a 
delusion.' 
The existence of any false accusation of childhood sexual abuse 
- especially those created under the ministrations of an authority 
figure - has, it seems to me, relevance to the alien abduction issue. 
If some people can with great passion and conviction be led to 
falsely remember being abused by their own parents, might not 
others, with comparable passion and conviction, be led to falsely 
remember being abused by aliens? 
The more I look into claims of alien abduction, the more 
similar they seem to reports of 'recovered memories' of child-
hood sexual abuse. And there's a third class of related claims, 
repressed 'memories' of satanic ritual cults - in which sexual 
torture, coprophilia, infanticide and cannibalism are said to be 
prominently featured. In a survey of 2,700 members of the 
American Psychological Association, 12 per cent replied that 
they had treated cases of satanic ritual abuse (while 30 per cent 
149 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
reported cases of abuse done in the name of religion). Some-
thing like 10,000 cases are reported annually in the United 
States in recent years. A significant number of those touting the 
peril of rampant satanism in America, including law enforce-
ment officers who organize seminars on the subject, turn out to 
be Christian fundamentalists; their sects explicitly require a 
literal devil to be meddling in everyday human life. The 
connection is neatly drawn in the saying 'No Satan, no God'. 
Apparently, there is a pervasive police gullibility problem on 
this matter. Here are some excerpts from FBI expert Lanning's 
analysis of 'Satanic, Occult and Ritualistic Crime', based on bitter 
experience, and published in the October 1989 issue of the 
professional journal, The Police Chief: 
Almost any discussion of satanism and witchcraft is inter-
preted in the light of the religious beliefs of those in the 
audience. Faith, not logic and reason, governs the religious 
beliefs of most people. As a result, some normally sceptical 
law enforcement officers accept the information disseminated 
at these conferences without critically evaluating it or ques-
tioning the sources . . . For some people satanism is any 
religious belief system other than their own. 
Lanning then offers a long list of belief systems he has 
personally heard described as satanism at such conferences. It 
includes Roman Catholicism, the Orthodox Churches, Islam, 
Buddhism, Hinduism, Mormonism, rock and roll music, chan-
nelling, astrology and New Age beliefs in general. Is there not a 
hint here about how witch hunts and pogroms get started? He 
continues: 
Within the personal religious belief system of a law enforce-
ment officer, Christianity may be good and satanism evil. 
Under the Constitution, however, both are neutral. This is an 
important, but difficult, concept for many law enforcement 
officers to accept. They are paid to uphold the penal code, 
not the Ten Commandments . . . The fact is that far more 
crime and child abuse has been committed by zealots in the 
150 


Therapy 
name of God, Jesus and Mohammed than has ever been 
committed in the name of Satan. Many people don't like that 
statement, but few can argue with it. 
Many of those alleging satanic abuse describe grotesque orgiastic 
rituals in which infants are murdered and eaten. Such claims have 
been made about reviled groups by their detractors throughout 
European history, including the Cataline conspirators in Rome, 
the Passover 'blood libel' against the Jews, and the Knights 
Templar as they were being dismantled in fourteenth-century 
France. Ironically, reports of cannibalistic infanticide and incestu-
ous orgies were among the particulars used by Roman authorities 
to persecute the early Christians. After all, Jesus himself is quoted 
as saying (John vi, 53) 'Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of man, 
and drink his blood, ye have no life in you'. Although the next line 
makes it clear Jesus is talking about eating his own flesh and 
drinking his own blood, unsympathetic critics might have misun-
derstood the Greek 'Son of man' to mean 'child' or 'infant'. 
Tertullian and other early Church fathers defended themselves 
against these grotesque accusations as best they could. 
Today, the lack of corresponding numbers of lost infants and 
young children in police files is explained by the claim that all over 
the world babies are being bred for this purpose, surely reminis-
cent of abductee claims that alien/human breeding experiments 
are rampant. Also similar to the alien abduction paradigm, satanic 
cult abuse is said to pass down from generation to generation in 
certain families. To the best of my knowledge, as in the alien 
abduction paradigm, no physical evidence has ever been offered 
in a court of law to support such claims. Their emotional power, 
though, is evident. The mere possibility that such things are going 
on rouses us mammals to action. When we give credence to 
satanic ritual, we also raise the social status of those who warn us 
of the supposed danger. 
Consider these five cases: (1) Myra Obasi, a Louisiana school-
teacher, was - she and her sisters believed after consultation with 
a hoodoo practitioner - possessed by demons. Her nephew's 
nightmares were part of the evidence. So they left for Dallas, 
abandoned their five children, and the sisters then gouged out Ms 
151 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
Obasi's eyes. At the trial, she defended her sisters. They were 
trying to help her, she said. But hoodoo is not devil-worship; it is a 
cross between Catholicism and African-Haitian nativist religion. 
(2) Parents beat their child to death because she would not 
embrace their brand of Christianity. (3) A child molester justifies 
his acts by reading the Bible to his victims. (4) A 14-year-old boy 
has his eyeball plucked out of his head in an exorcism ceremony. 
His assailant is not a satanist, but a Protestant fundamentalist 
minister engaged in religious pursuits. (5) A woman thinks her 
12-year-old son is possessed by the devil. After an incestuous 
relationship with him, she decapitates him. But there is no satanic 
ritual content to the 'possession'. 
The second and third cases come from FBI files. The last two 
come from a 1994 study by Dr Gail Goodman, a psychologist at 
the University of California, Davis, and her colleagues, done for 
the National Center on Child Abuse and Neglect. They examined 
over 12,000 claims of sexual abuse involving satanic ritual cults, 
and could not find a single one that held up to scrutiny. Therapists 
reported satanic abuse based only on, for instance, 'patient's 
disclosure via hypnotherapy' or children's 'fear of satanic sym-
bols'. In some cases diagnosis was made on the basis of behaviour 
common to many children. 'In only a few cases was physical 
evidence mentioned - usually, "scars".' But in most cases the 
'scars' were very faint or non-existent. 'Even when there were 
scars, it was not determined whether the victims themselves had 
caused them.' This also is very similar to alien abduction cases, as 
described below. George K. Ganaway, Professor of Psychiatry at 
Emory University, proposes that 'the most common likely cause 
of cult-related memories may very well turn out to be a mutual 
deception between the patient and the therapist'. 
One of the most troublesome cases of 'recovered memory' of 
satanic ritual abuse has been chronicled by Lawrence Wright in a 
remarkable book, Remembering Satan (1994). It concerns Paul 
Ingram, a man who may have had his life ruined because he was 
too gullible, too suggestible, too unpractised in scepticism. Ingram 
was, in 1988, Chairman of the Republican Party in Olympia, 
Washington, the chief civil deputy in the local sheriff's depart-
ment, well regarded, highly religious, and responsible for warning 
152 


Therapy 
children in social assemblies of the dangers of drugs. Then came 
the nightmare moment when one of his daughters - after a highly 
emotional session at a fundamentalist religious retreat - levelled 
the first of many charges, each more ghastly than the previous, 
that Ingram had sexually abused her, impregnated her, tortured 
her, made her available to other sheriff's deputies, introduced her 
to satanic rites, dismembered and ate babies . . . This had gone 
on since her childhood, she said, almost to the day she began to 
'remember' it all. 
Ingram could not see why his daughter should lie about this, 
although he himself had no recollection of it. But police investiga-
tors, a consulting psychotherapist, and his minister at the Church 
of Living Water all explained that sex offenders often repressed 
memories of their crimes. Strangely detached but at the same time 
eager to cooperate, Ingram tried to recall. After a psychologist 
employed a closed-eye hypnotic technique to induce trance, 
Ingram began to visualize something similar to what the police 
were describing. What came to mind were not like real memories, 
but something like snatches of images in a fog. Every time he 
produced one - the more so the more odious the content - he was 
encouraged and reinforced. His pastor assured him that God 
would permit only genuine memories to surface in his reveries. 
'Boy, it's almost like I'm making it up,' Ingram said, 'but I'm not.' 
He suggested that a demon might be responsible. Under the same 
sort of influences, with the Church grapevine circulating the latest 
horrors that Ingram was confessing, and the police pressuring them, 
his other children and his wife also began 'remembering'. Prominent 
citizens were accused of participating in the orgiastic rites. Law 
enforcement officers elsewhere in America began paying attention. 
This was only the tip of the iceberg, some said. 
When Berkeley's Richard Ofshe was called in by the prosecu-
tion, he performed a control experiment. It was a breath of fresh 
air. Merely suggesting to Ingram that he had forced his son and 
daughter to commit incest and asking him to use the 'memory 
recovery' technique he had learned, promptly elicited just such a 
'memory'. It required no pressure, no intimidation - just the 
suggestion and the technique were enough. But the alleged 
participants, who had 'remembered' so much else, denied it ever 
153 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
happened. Confronted with this evidence, Ingram vehemently 
denied he was making anything up or was influenced by others. 
His memory of this incident was as clear and 'real' as all his other 
recollections. 
One of the daughters described the terrible scars on her body 
from torture and forced abortions. But when she finally received a 
medical examination, there were no corresponding scars to be 
seen. The prosecution never tried Ingram on charges of satanic 
abuse. Ingram hired a lawyer who had never tried a criminal case. 
On his pastor's advice, he did not even read Ofshe's report: it 
would only confuse him, he was told. He pleaded guilty to six 
counts of rape, and ultimately was sent to prison. In jail, while 
awaiting sentencing, away from his daughters, his police col-
leagues and his pastor, he reconsidered. He asked to withdraw his 
guilty plea. His memories had been coerced. He had not distin-
guished real memories from a kind of fantasy. His plea was 
rejected. He is serving a twenty-year sentence. If it was the 
sixteenth century instead of the twentieth, perhaps the whole 
family would have been burned at the stake, along with a good 
fraction of the leading citizens of Olympia, Washington. 
The existence of a highly sceptical FBI report on the general 
subject of satanic abuse (Kenneth V. Lanning, 'Investigator's 
Guide to Allegations of "Ritual" Child Abuse', January 1992) is 
widely ignored by enthusiasts. Likewise, a 1994 study by the 
British Department of Health into claims of satanic abuse there 
concluded that, of 84 alleged instances, not one stood up to 
scrutiny. What then is all the furore about? The study explains, 
The Evangelical Christian campaign against new religious 
movements has been a powerful influence encouraging the 
identification of satanic abuse. Equally, if not more, impor-
tant in spreading the idea of satanic abuse in Britain are the 
'specialists', American and British. They may have few or 
even no qualifications as professionals, but attribute their 
expertise to 'experience of cases'. 
Those convinced that devil cults represent a serious danger to our 
society tend to be impatient with sceptics. Consider this analysis 
154 


Therapy 
by Corydon Hammond, PhD, past President of the American 
Society for Clinical Hypnosis: 
I will suggest to you that these people [sceptics] are either, 
one, naive and of limited clinical experience; two, have a kind 
of naivete that people have of the Holocaust, or they're just 
such intellectualizers and sceptics that they'll doubt every-
thing; or, three, they're cult people themselves. And I can 
assure that there are people who are in that position . . . 
There are people who are physicians, who are mental health 
professionals, who are in the cults, who are raising trans-
generational cults . . . I think the research is real clear: We 
got three studies, one found 25 percent, one found 20 percent 
of out-patient multiples [multiple personality disorders] 
appear to be cult-abuse victims, and another on a specialized 
in-patient unit found 50 percent. 
In some of his statements, he seems to believe that satanic Nazi 
mind control experiments have been performed by the CIA on 
tens of thousands of unsuspecting American citizens. The over-
arching motive, Hammond believes, is to 'create a satanic order 
that will rule the world'. 
In all three classes of 'recovered memories', there are specialists 
- alien abduction specialists, satanic cult specialists, and specialists 
in recalling repressed memories of childhood sexual abuse. As is 
common in mental health practice, patients select or are referred 
to a therapist whose specialist seems relevant to their complaint. 
In all three classes, the therapist helps to draw forth images of 
events alleged to have occurred long ago (in some cases from 
decades past); in all three, therapists are profoundly moved by the 
unmistakably genuine agony of their patients; in all three, at least 
some therapists are known to ask leading questions - which are 
virtually orders by authority figures to suggestible patients insist-
ing that they remember (I almost wrote 'confess'); in all three, 
there are networks of therapists who trade client histories and 
therapeutic methods; in all three, practitioners feel the necessity 
of defending their practice against more sceptical colleagues; in all 
three, the iatrogenic hypothesis is given short shrift; in all three, 
155 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
the majority of those who report abuse are women. And in all 
three classes - with the exceptions mentioned - there is no 
physical evidence. So it's hard not to wonder whether alien 
abductions might be part of some larger picture. 
What could this larger picture be? I posed this question to Dr 
Fred H. Frankel, professor of psychiatry at Harvard Medical 
School, Chief of Psychiatry at Beth Israel Hospital in Boston, and 
a leading expert on hypnosis. His answer: 
If alien abductions are a part of a larger picture, what indeed 
is the larger picture? I fear to rush in where angels fear to 
tread; however, the factors you outline all feed what was 
described at the turn of the century as 'hysteria'. The term, 
sadly, became so widely used that our contemporaries in their 
dubious wisdom . . . not only dropped it, but also lost sight of 
the phenomena it represented: high levels of suggestibility, 
imaginal capacity, sensitivity to contextual cues and expecta-
tions, and the element of contagion . . . Little of all of this 
seems to be appreciated by a large number of practicing 
clinicians. 
In exact parallel to regressing people so they supposedly retrieve 
forgotten memories of 'past lives', Frankel notes that therapists 
can as readily progress people under hypnosis so they can 
'remember' their futures. This elicits the same emotive intensity as 
in regression or in Mack's abductee hypnosis. 'These people are 
not out to deceive the therapist. They deceive themselves,' 
Frankel says. 'They cannot distinguish their confabulations from 
their experiences.' 
If we fail to cope, if we're saddled with a burden of guilt for not 
having made more of ourselves, wouldn't we welcome the profes-
sional opinion of a therapist with a diploma on the wall that it's 
not our fault, that we're off the hook, that satanists, or sexual 
abusers, or aliens from another planet are the responsible parties? 
Wouldn't we be willing to pay good money for this reassurance? 
And wouldn't we resist smart-ass sceptics telling us that it's all in 
our heads, or that it's implanted by the very therapists who have 
made us happier about ourselves? 
156 


Therapy 
How much training in scientific method and sceptical scrutiny, in 
statistics, or even in human fallibility have these therapists received? 
Psychoanalysis is not a very self-critical profession, but at least 
many of its practitioners have MD degrees. Most medical curricula 
include significant exposure to scientific results and methods. But 
many of those dealing with abuse cases seem to have at best a 
casual acquaintance with science. Mental health providers in 
America are more likely by about two-to-one to be social workers 
than either psychiatrists or PhD psychologists. 
Most of these therapists contend that their responsibility is to 
support their patients, not to question, to be sceptical, or to raise 
doubts. Whatever is presented, no matter how bizarre, is accepted. 
Sometimes the prompting by therapists is not at all subtle. Here 
[from the False Memory Syndrome Foundation's FMS Newsletter, 
vol. 4, no. 4, p. 3, 1995] is a hardly atypical report: 
My former therapist has testified that he still believes that my 
mother is a satanist, [and] that my father molested me . . . It 
was my therapist's delusional belief system and techniques 
involving suggestion and persuasion that led me to believe 
the lies were memories. When I doubted the reality of the 
memories he insisted they were true. Not only did he insist 
they were true, he informed me that in order to get well I 
must not only accept them as real, but remember them all. 
In a 1991 case in Allegheny County, Pennsylvania, a teenager, Nicole 
Althaus, encouraged by a teacher and a social worker, accused her 
father of having sexually abused her, resulting in his arrest. Nicole also 
reported that she had given birth to three children, who her relatives 
had killed, that she had been raped in a crowded restaurant, and that 
her grandmother flew about on a broom. Nicole recanted her allega-
tions the following year, and all charges against her father were 
dropped. Nicole and her parents brought a civil suit against the 
therapist and psychiatric clinic to whom Nicole had been referred 
shortly after she began making her accusations. The jury found that 
the doctor and the clinic had been negligent and awarded almost a 
quarter of a million dollars to Nicole and her parents. There are 
increasing numbers of cases of this sort. 
157 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
Might the competition among therapists for patients, and the 
obvious financial interest of therapists in prolonged therapy, make 
them less likely to offend patients by evincing some scepticism 
about their stories? How aware are they of the dilemma of a naive 
patient walking into a professional office and being told that the 
insomnia or obesity is due (in increasing order of bizarreness) to 
wholly forgotten parental abuse, satanic ritual, or alien abduction? 
While there are ethical and other constraints, we need something 
like a control experiment: perhaps the same patient sent to special-
ists in all three fields. Does any of them say, 'No, your problem isn't 
due to forgotten childhood abuse' (or forgotten satanic ritual, or 
alien abduction, as appropriate)? How many of them say, 'There's a 
much more prosaic explanation'? Instead, Mack goes so far as to 
tell one of his patients admiringly and reassuringly that he is on a 
'hero's journey'. One group of 'abductees' - each having a separate 
but similar experience - writes 
[S]everal of us had finally summoned enough courage to 
present our experiences to professional counselors, only to 
have them nervously avoid the subject, raise an eyebrow in 
silence or interpret the experience as a dream or waking 
hallucination and patronizingly 'reassure' us that such things 
happen to people, 'but don't worry, you're basically mentally 
sound.' Great! We're not crazy, but if we take our experiences 
seriously, then we might become crazy! 
With enormous relief, they found a sympathetic therapist who not 
only accepted their stories at face value, but was full of stories of 
alien bodies and high-level government cover-up of UFOs. 
A typical UFO therapist finds his subjects in three ways: they 
write letters to him at an address given in the back of his books; 
they are referred to him by other therapists (mainly those who also 
specialize in alien abductions); or they come up to him after he 
presents a lecture. I wonder if any patient arrives at his portal 
wholly ignorant of popular abduction accounts and the therapist's 
own methods and beliefs. Before any words are exchanged, they 
know a great deal about one another. 
Another prominent therapist gives his patients his own articles on 
158 


Therapy 
alien abductions to help them 'remember' their experiences. He is 
gratified when what they eventually recall under hypnosis resembles 
what he describes in his papers. The similarity of the cases is one of 
his chief reasons for believing that abductions really occur. 
A leading UFO scholar comments that 'When the hypnotist does 
not have an adequate knowledge of the subject [of alien abductions], 
the true nature of the abduction may never be revealed'. Can we 
discern in this remark how the patient might be led without the 
therapist realizing that he's leading? 
Sometimes when 'falling' asleep we have the sense of toppling from 
a height, and our limbs suddenly flail on their own. The startle 
reflex, it's called. Perhaps it's left over from when our ancestors slept 
in trees. Why should we imagine we recollect (a wonderful word) 
any better than we know when we're on firm ground? Why should 
we suppose that, of the vast treasure of memories stored in our 
heads, none of it could have been implanted after the event, by how 
a question is phrased when we're in a suggestible frame of mind, by 
the pleasure of telling or hearing a good story, by confusion with 
something we once read or overheard? 
159 


10 
The Dragon in My Garage 
fire-breathing dragon lives in my garage.' Suppose (I'm 
following a group therapy approach by the psychologist 
Richard Franklin) I seriously make such an assertion to you. 
Surely you'd want to check it out, see for yourself. There have 
been innumerable stories of dragons over the centuries, but no 
real evidence. What an opportunity! 
'Show me,' you say. I lead you to my garage. You look inside and 
see a ladder, empty paint cans, an old tricycle - but no dragon. 
'Where's the dragon?' you ask. 
'Oh, she's right here,' I reply, waving vaguely. 'I neglected to 
mention that she's an invisible dragon.' 
You propose spreading flour on the floor of the garage to 
capture the dragon's footprints. 
'Good idea,' I say, 'but this dragon floats in the air.' 
Then you'll use an infrared sensor to detect the invisible fire. 
'Good idea, but the invisible fire is also heatless.' 
You'll spray-paint the dragon and make her visible. 
'Good idea, except she's an incorporeal dragon and the paint 
won't stick.' 
160 
A 
' 
[M]agic, it must be remembered, is an art which demands 
collaboration between the artist and his public. 
E.M. Butler, 
The Myth of the Magus (1948) 
