THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
trying to find evidence of life after death. If my testimony is worth 
quoting, it seems clear he hasn't found much. Many letter writers 
concluded that since I had worked on the possibility of extrater-
restrial life, I must 'believe' in UFOs; or conversely that, if I was 
sceptical about UFOs, I must embrace the absurd belief that 
humans are the only intelligent beings in the Universe. There's 
something about this subject unconducive to clear thinking. 
Here, without further comment, is a representative sampling of 
my mail on the subject: 
• I wonder how some of our fellow animals may describe their 
encounters with us. They see a large hovering object making a 
terrible noise above them. They begin to run and feel a sharp 
pain in their side. Suddenly they fall to the ground . . . Several 
man-creatures approach them carrying strange-looking instru-
ments. They examine your sexual organs and teeth. They place 
a net under you and then let it take you in the air with a strange 
device. After all the examinations, they then clamp a strange 
metal object on your ear. Then, just as suddenly as they had 
appeared, they are gone. Eventually, muscle control returns, 
and a poor disoriented creature staggers off into the forest, not 
knowing [whether] what just transpired was a nightmare or a 
reality. 
• I was sexually abused as a child. In my recovery I have drawn 
many 'space beings' and have felt many times I was being 
overpowered, held down, and the sensation of having left my 
body to float around the room. None of the abductee accounts 
really come as a surprise to someone who has dealt with 
childhood sexual abuse issues . . . Believe me, I would much 
rather have blamed my abuse on a space alien than have to face 
the truth about what happened to me with the adults I was 
supposed to be able to trust. It's been driving me crazy to hear 
some of my friends speak of their memories that imply they 
have been abducted by aliens . . . I keep saying to them that 
this is the ultimate victim role in which we as adults have no 
power when these little gray men come to us in our sleep! This 
is not real. The ultimate victim role is the one between an 
abusive parent and a victimized child. 
180 


The City of Grief 
• I don't know if these people are some sort of demons, or if they 
really don't exist. My daughter said she had sensors put in her 
body when she was small. I don't know . . . We keep our doors 
locked and bolted and it really scares me. I don't have the 
money to send her to a good doctor, and she can't work on 
account of all this . . . My daughter is hearing a voice on a tape. 
These go out at night and take kids and sexually abuse them. If 
you don't do as they say, someone in your family will be hurt. 
Who in their right mind would harm little children? They know 
everything that is said in the house . . . Somebody said long, 
long ago somebody put a curse on our family. If somebody did, 
how do you get the curse off? I know all this sounds strange and 
bizarre, but believe me it's scary. 
• How many human females who had the misfortune of being 
raped had the foresight to take from their attacker an ID card, 
a picture of the rapist, or anything else which could be used as 
evidence as to an alleged rape? 
• I for one will be sleeping with my Polaroid from now on, in 
hopes that the next time I'm abducted I can provide the proof 
needed . . . Why should it be up to the abductees to prove 
what's happening? 
• I am living proof of Carl Sagan's claim of the possibility that 
alien abductions occur in the minds of people suffering from 
sleep paralysis. They truly believe it's real. 
• In AD 2001 Starships from the 33 planets of the Interplanetary 
Confederation will land on earth carrying 33,000 Brothers! 
They are extraterrestrial teachers and scientists who will help to 
expand our understanding of interplanetary life, as our own 
earth planet will become the 33rd member of the Confedera-
tion! 
• This is a grotesquely challenging arena . . . I studied UFOs for 
over 20 years. Finally I became quite disenchanted by the cult 
and the cult fringe groups. 
• I am a 47-year-old grandmother who has been the victim of this 
phenomena since early childhood. I do not - nor have I ever -
accepted it at face value. I do not - nor have I ever - claimed to 
understand what it is . . . I would gladly accept a diagnosis of 
schizophrenia, or some other understood pathology, in 
181 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
exchange for this unknown . . . The lack of physical evidence 
is, I fully agree, most frustrating for both victims and research-
ers. Unfortunately, the retrieval of such evidence is made 
extremely difficult by the manner in which the victims are 
abducted. Often I am removed either in my nightgown (which 
is later removed) or already naked. This condition makes it 
quite impossible to hide a camera . . . I have awakened with 
deep gashes, puncture wounds, scooped out tissue, eye dam-
age, bleeding from the nose and ears, burns, and finger marks 
and bruises which persist for days after the event. I have had all 
of these examined by qualified physicians but none have been 
satisfactorily explained. I am not into self-mutilation; these are 
not stigmata . . . Please be aware that the majority of abduct-
ees claim to have had no interest in UFOs previously (I am 
one), have no history of childhood abuses (I am one), have no 
desire for publicity or notoriety (I am one), and, in fact, have 
gone to great lengths to avoid acknowledging any involvement 
whatsoever, assuming he or she is experiencing a nervous 
breakdown or other psychological disorder (I am one). Agreed, 
there are many self-proclaimed abductees (and contactees) who 
seek out publicity for monetary gain or to satisfy a need for 
attention. I would be the last to deny these people exist. What I 
do deny is that ALL abductees are imagining or falsifying these 
events to satisfy their own personal agendas. 
• UFOs don't exist. I think that requires an external energy 
source, and this doesn't exist . . . I have spoken with Jesus. 
• The commentary on the Parade magazine is very destructive, 
and it enjoys scaring society, I beg you to think more openly 
because our intelligent beings from outer spaces do exist and 
they are our creators . . . I too was an abductee. To be honest, 
these dear beings have done me more good than bad. They 
have saved my life . . . The trouble with Earth beings is that 
they want proof, proof, and proof! 
• In the Bible it talks about terrestrial and celestial bodies. This is 
not to say that God is out for sexual abuse on people or that 
we're crazy. 
• I have been strongly telepathic for twenty-seven years now. I 
do not receive - I transmit . . . Waves are coming from outer 
182 


The City of Grief 
space somewhere - beaming through my head and transmitting 
thoughts, words, and images into the heads of anybody within 
range . . . Images will pop into my head that I did not put there, 
and vanish just as suddenly. Dreams are not dreams anymore -
they are more like Hollywood productions . . . They are smart 
critters and they won't give up . . . Maybe all these little guys 
want to do is communicate . . . If I finally go psychotic from all 
this pressure - or have another heart attack - there goes your 
last sure evidence that there is life in space. 
• I think I have found a plausible terrestrial scientific explanation 
for numerous UFO reports. [The writer then discusses ball 
lightning.] If you like my stuff, could you help me get it 
published? 
• Sagan refuses to take seriously the witnesses' reports of any-
thing that twentieth-century science can't explain. 
• Now readers will feel free to treat abductees . . . as if they are 
victims of nothing more than an illusion. Abductees suffer the 
same sort of trauma a rape victim endures, and to have their 
experiences rejected by those closest to them is a second 
victimization that leaves them without any support system. 
Encounters with aliens is hard enough to cope with; victims 
need support, not rationalizations. 
• My friend Frankie wants me to bring back an ashtray or a 
matchbook, but I think these visitors are probably much too 
intelligent to smoke. 
• My own feeling is that the alien abduction phenomena is little 
more than a dreamlike sequence vicariously retrieved from 
memory storage. There are no more little green men or flying 
saucers than there are images of those things already stored in 
our brains. 
• When alleged scientists conspire to censor and intimidate those 
who endeavor to offer new insightful hypotheses on conven-
tional theories . . . they no longer should be considered scien-
tists, but merely the insecure, self-serving impostors that they 
apparently are . . . In the same token, must we all still suppose 
that J. Edgar Hoover was a fine FBI director, rather than the 
homosexual tool of organized crime he was? 
• Your conclusion that large numbers of people in this country, 
183 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
perhaps as many as five million, are all victims of an identical 
mass hallucination is asinine. 
• Thanks to the Supreme Court . . . America is now wide open 
for the Eastern pagan religions, under the aegis of Satan and his 
demons, so now we have four-foot gray beings kidnapping 
Earthlings and performing all sorts of experiments on them, 
and are being propagated by those who are educated beyond 
their intelligence and should know better . . . Your question 
['Are We Being Visited?'] is no problem for those who know 
the word of God, and are born-again Christians, and are 
looking for our Redeemer from Heaven, to rapture us out of 
this world of sin, sickness, war, AIDS, crime, abortion, homo-
sexuality, New-Age-New-World-Order indoctrination, media 
brainwashing, perversion and subversion in government, educa-
tion, business, finance, society, religion, etc. Those who reject the 
Creator God of the Bible are bound to fall for the kind of fairy 
tales which your article tries to propagate as being truth. 
• If there is no reason to take the matter of alien visitation 
seriously, why is it the most highly classified subject in the US 
government? 
• Perhaps some vastly older alien race, from a relatively metal-
deficient star system, is seeking to prolong its existence by 
taking over a younger, better world and blending with its 
inhabitants. 
• If I were a betting man, I would give you odds that your 
mailbox will overflow with stories such as I just related. I 
suspect that the psychic [psyche] brings forth these demons and 
angels, lights and circles as a part of our development. They are 
part of our nature. 
• Science has become the 'magic that works'. The UFOlogists are 
heretics to be excommunicated or burned at the stake. 
• [Several readers wrote to say that aliens were demons sent by 
Satan, who is able to cloud our minds. One proposes that the 
insidious Satanic purpose is to make us worried about an alien 
invasion, so that when Jesus and his angels appear over 
Jerusalem we will be frightened rather than glad.] I do hope 
you will not dismiss me as another religious crackpot. I am 
quite normal and well-known in my own little community. 
184 


The City of Grief 
• You, sir, are in a position to do one of two things: know about 
the abductions and be covering them up, or feel that because 
you have not been abducted (perhaps they are not interested in 
you) they do not occur. 
• A treason suit [was filed] against the President and Congress of 
the United States over a treaty made with aliens in the early 
'40s, who had later shown themselves to be hostile . . . The 
treaty agreed to protect the secrecy of the aliens in return for 
some of their technology [stealth aircraft and fibre optics, 
another correspondent reveals]. 
• Some of these beings are capable of intercepting the spiritual 
body when it is traveling. 
• I am having communication with an alien being. This communi-
cation started early in 1992. What else can I say? 
• The aliens can stay a step or two ahead of the thinking of 
scientists, and know how to leave insufficient clues behind that 
would satisfy the Sagan types, until society is better prepared 
mentally to face up to it all . . . Perhaps you share the view that 
what's going on with respect to UFOs and aliens, if deemed 
real, would be too traumatic to think about. However . . . 
they've shown themselves until back some 5,000-15,000 years 
or more ago when they were here for extended periods, 
spawning the god/goddess mythology of all cultures. The 
bottom line is that in all that time they haven't taken over 
Earth; they haven't subjected us or wiped us out. 
• Homo sapiens was genetically fashioned, created initially to be 
substitute laborers and domestics for the SKY-LORDS 
(DINGIRS/ELOHIM/ANUNNAKI). 
• The explosion that people saw was hydrogen fuel from a star 
cruiser, the landing sight was to be Northern California . . . 
The people on that star cruiser looked like Mr Spock from the 
'Star Trek' TV series. 
• Be the reports from the fifteenth century or the twentieth, a 
common thread ties the reports. Individuals who have expe-
rienced sexual trauma have a great deal of difficulty under-
standing and coping with the trauma. The terms used to 
describe the [resulting] hallucinations can be incoherent and 
incomprehensible. 
185 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
We find we are not as intelligent as we thought although we are 
still stiff-necked and our greatest sin is our pride. And we do 
not even know we are being led to Armageddon. The star 
pin-pointed a single shed, moved across the sky leading wise-
men to that shed, frightened shepherds with the words fear not. 
Its spotlight was Ezekiel's glory of God, Paul's light that 
temporarily blinded him . . . It was the ship in which little men 
took off old Rip, the little men called brownies, fairies, elves, 
these 'creations' of creators given specific duties . . . The God 
People are not yet ready to make themselves known to us. 
First, Armageddon, then, after we KNOW, we can go it alone. 
When we are humbled, when we do not shoot them down, God 
will return. 
The answer to these aliens from outer-space is simple. It comes 
from man. Man using drugs on people. In mental institutions all 
over the country, there are people who have no control over 
their emotions and behaviour. To control these people, they 
are given a variety of antipsychotic drugs . . . If you have been 
drugged often . . . you will begin to have what is called 
'bleedthroughs'. This will be flash images popping into your 
mind of strange-looking people coming up to your face. This 
will begin your search for the answer of what the aliens were 
doing to you. You will be one of the thousands of UFO 
abductees. People will call you crazy. The reason for the 
strange creatures you are seeing is because Thorazine distorts 
the vision of your subconscious mind . . . The writer was 
laughed at, ridiculed, had his life threatened [because of 
presenting these ideas]. 
Hypnosis prepares the mind for the invasion of demons, devils, 
and little gray men. God wants us to be clothed and in our right 
minds . . . Anything your 'little gray men' can do, Christ can 
do better! 
I hope that I never feel so superior that I cannot acknowledge 
that Creation is not limited to myself, but encompasses the 
Universe and all its entities. 
In 1977 an heavenly body spoke to me about an injury to my 
head that happened in 1968. 
[A letter from a man who had twenty-four separate encounters 
186 


The City of Grief 
with] a silent hovering saucer-shaped vehicle [and who has in 
consequence] experienced an ongoing development and ampli-
fication of such mental functions as clairvoyance, telepathy, 
and the challenging [channelling] of universal life energy for the 
purpose of healing. 
• Over the years I have seen and talked to 'ghosts', been visited 
(though not yet abducted) by aliens, seen three-dimensional 
heads floating by my bed, heard knocks on my door . . . These 
experiences seemed as real as life. I have never thought of these 
experiences as anything more than what they certainly are: my 
mind playing tricks on itself.* 
• A hallucination might account for 99%, but can it ever account 
for 100%? 
• UFOs are . . . a subject of deep fantasy which has no FAC-
TUAL BASIS WHATSOEVER. I pray you won't lend your 
credence to a hoax. 
• Dr Sagan served on the Air Force committee that evaluated 
government investigations of UFOs, and yet he wants us to 
believe that there's no substantial proof that UFOs exist. Please 
explain why the government needed to be evaluated. 
• I'm going to lobby my Representative to try to cancel funds for 
this program of listening for alien signals from space, because it 
would be a waste of money. They're already among us. 
• The government spends millions of tax dollars for researching 
UFOs. The SETI project (search for extraterrestrial intelli-
gence) would be a waste of money if the government truly 
believed UFOs were non-existent. I am personally excited 
about the SETI project because it shows that we're moving in 
the right direction; towards communication with aliens, rather 
than being an unwilling observer. 
• The succubi, which I identified more as astral rape, occurred 
from '78-'92. It was hard on a moral and seriously practicing 
Catholic, demoralizing, dehumanizing, and quite literally had 
me worried by the physical aftermath of disease effects. 
• The space people are coming! They hope to remove whom they 
can, especially children who are the 'seedlings' of the next 
* From a letter received by The Skeptical Inquirer; courtesy, Kendrick Frazier. 
187 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
humanity generation along with their cooperating parents, 
grandparents and other adults, to safety before the upcoming 
major sunspot/planetary peak, which is just over the horizon. 
The Space Ship is in sight every night and close in to assist us 
when the Major Solar Flares do, before turbulence starts in the 
atmosphere. The Polar Shift is due now as it moves to its new 
position for the Aquarian Age . . . [The authors also inform 
me that they are] working with the Ashtar Command, where 
Jesus Christ meets with those aboard for instructions. Many 
dignitaries are present, including archangels Michael and 
Gabriel. 
• I have extensive experience in therapeutic energy work, which 
involves removing grid patterns, negative memory cords, and 
alien implants from human bodies and their surrounding energy 
fields. My work is primarily utilized as an adjunctive aide to 
psychotherapy. My clients range from businessmen, home-
makers, professional artists, therapists, and children . . . The 
alien energy is very fluid, both within the body and after it is 
removed, and must be contained as soon as possible. The 
energy grids are most often locked around the heart or in a 
triangular formation across the shoulders. 
• I don't know how, after such an experience, I could have just 
turned over and gone back to sleep. 
• I believe in happy endings. I always have. Once you have seen a 
figure as tall as the room - with golden hair, and shining like a 
lighted Christmas tree, lifting up the little child beside us, how 
could you not? I understood the message the figure was 
relaying - to the little child - and it was me. We had always 
talked together. How else could life be bearable - in a place 
like this? . . . Unfamiliar mental states? You put your finger 
right on it. 
• Who is really in charge of this planet? 
188 


12 
The Fine Art of Baloney Detection 
The human understanding is no dry light, but receives infusion 
from the will and affections; whence proceed sciences which 
may be called 'sciences as one would'. For what a man had 
rather were true he more readily believes. Therefore he rejects 
difficult things from impatience of research; sober things, 
because they narrow hope; the deeper things of nature, from 
superstition; the light of experience, from arrogance and pride; 
things not commonly believed, out of deference to the opinion 
of the vulgar. Numberless in short are the ways, and 
sometimes imperceptible, in which the affections colour and 
infect the understanding. 
Francis Bacon, 
Novum Organon (1620) 
M
y parents died years ago. I was very close to them. I still miss 
them terribly. I know I always will. I long to believe that 
their essence, their personalities, what I loved so much about 
them, are - really and truly - still in existence somewhere. I 
wouldn't ask very much, just five or ten minutes a year, say, to tell 
them about their grandchildren, to catch them up on the latest 
news, to remind them that I love them. There's a part of me - no 
matter how childish it sounds - that wonders how they are. 'Is 
everything all right?' I want to ask. The last words I found myself 
saying to my father, at the moment of his death, were 'Take care'. 
189 
