THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
alike, from courthouse and statehouse, the notion that they were 
hereditary inferiors, that God intended them for their misery. The 
Holy Bible, as countless passages confirmed, condoned slavery. In 
these ways the 'peculiar institution' maintained itself despite its 
monstrous nature - something even its practitioners must have 
glimpsed. 
There was a most revealing rule: slaves were to remain illiter-
ate. In the antebellum South, whites who taught a slave to read 
were severely punished. '[To] make a contented slave,' Bailey 
later wrote, 'it is necessary to make a thoughtless one. It is 
necessary to darken his moral and mental vision, and, as far as 
possible, to annihilate the power of reason.' This is why the 
slaveholders must control what slaves hear and see and think. This 
is why reading and critical thinking are dangerous, indeed subver-
sive, in an unjust society. 
So now picture Frederick Bailey in 1828 - a 10-year-old 
African-American child, enslaved, with no legal rights of any 
kind, long since torn from his mother's arms, sold away from the 
tattered remnants of his extended family as if he were a calf or a 
pony, conveyed to an unknown household in the strange city of 
Baltimore, and condemned to a life of drudgery with no prospect 
of reprieve. 
Bailey was sent to work for Capt Hugh Auld and his wife, 
Sophia, moving from plantation to urban bustle, from field 
work to housework. In this new environment, he came every 
day upon letters, books and people who could read. He 
discovered what he called 'this mystery' of reading: there was a 
connection between the letters on the page and the movement 
of the reader's lips, a nearly one-to-one correlation between the 
black squiggles and the sounds uttered. Surreptitiously, he 
studied from young Tommy Auld's Webster's Spelling Book. 
He memorized the letters of the alphabet. He tried to under-
stand the sounds they stood for. Eventually, he asked Sophia 
Auld to help him learn. Impressed with the intelligence and 
dedication of the boy, and perhaps ignorant of the prohibitions, 
she complied. 
By the time Frederick was spelling words of three and four 
letters, Captain Auld discovered what was going on. Furious, 
334 


The Path to Freedom 
he ordered Sophia to stop. In Frederick's presence he 
explained: 
A nigger should know nothing but to obey his master - to do 
as he is told to do. Learning would spoil the best nigger in the 
world. Now, if you teach that nigger how to read, there would 
be no keeping him. It would forever unfit him to be a slave. 
Auld chastised Sophia in this way as if Frederick Bailey were not 
there in the room with them, or as if he were a block of wood. 
But Auld had revealed to Bailey the great secret: 'I now 
understood . . . the white man's power to enslave the black man. 
From that moment, I understood the pathway from slavery to 
freedom.' 
Without further help from the now reticent and intimidated 
Sophia Auld, Frederick found ways to continue learning how to 
read, including buttonholing white schoolchildren on the streets. 
Then he began teaching his fellow slaves: 'Their minds had been 
starved . . . They had been shut up in mental darkness. I taught 
them, because it was the delight of my soul.' 
With his knowledge of reading playing a key role in his escape, 
Bailey fled to New England, where slavery was illegal and black 
people were free. He changed his name to Frederick Douglass 
(after a character in Walter Scott's The Lady of the Lake), eluded 
the bounty hunters who tracked down escaped slaves, and became 
one of the greatest orators, writers and political leaders in 
American history. All his life, he understood that literacy had 
been the way out. 
For 99 per cent of the tenure of humans on earth, nobody could 
read or write. The great invention had not yet been made. Except 
for first-hand experience, almost everything we knew was passed 
on by word of mouth. As in the game of 'Chinese Whispers', over 
tens and hundreds of generations, information would slowly be 
distorted and lost. 
Books changed all that. Books, purchasable at low cost, permit 
us to interrogate the past with high accuracy; to tap the wisdom of 
our species; to understand the point of view of others, and not just 
335 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
those in power; to contemplate - with the best teachers - the 
insights, painfully extracted from Nature, of the greatest minds 
that ever were, drawn from the entire planet and from all of our 
history. They allow people long dead to talk inside our heads. 
Books can accompany us everywhere. Books are patient where we 
are slow to understand, allow us to go over the hard parts as many 
times as we wish, and are never critical of our lapses. Books are 
key to understanding the world and participating in a democratic 
society. 
By some standards, African-Americans have made enormous 
strides in literacy since Emancipation. In 1860, it is estimated, 
only about five per cent of African-Americans could read and 
write. By 1890, 39 per cent were judged literate by the US census; 
and by 1969, 96 per cent. Between 1940 and 1992, the fraction of 
African-Americans who had completed high school soared from 
seven per cent to 82 per cent. But fair questions can be asked 
about the quality of that education, and the standards of literacy 
tested. These questions apply to every ethnic group. 
A national survey done for the US Department of Education 
paints a picture of a country with more than 40 million barely 
literate adults. Other estimates are much worse. The literacy of 
young adults has slipped dramatically in the last decade. Only 
three to four per cent of the population scores at the highest of 
five reading levels (essentially everybody in this group has gone to 
college). The vast majority have no idea how bad their reading is. 
Only four per cent of those at the highest reading level are in 
poverty, but 43 per cent of those at the lowest reading level are. 
Although it's not the only factor, of course, in general the better 
you read, the more you make - an average of about $12,000 a year 
at the lowest of these reading levels, and about $34,000 a year at 
the highest. It looks to be a necessary if not a sufficient condition 
for making money. And you're much more likely to be in prison if 
you're illiterate or barely literate. (In evaluating these facts, we 
must be careful not to improperly deduce causation from correla-
tion.) 
Also, marginally literate poorer people tend not to understand 
ballot initiatives that might help them and their children, and in 
stunningly disproportionate numbers fail to vote at all. This works 
336 


The Path to Freedom 
to undermine democracy at its roots. 
If Frederick Douglass as an enslaved child could teach himself 
into literacy and greatness, why should anyone in our more 
enlightened day and age remain unable to read? Well, it's not that 
simple, in part because few of us are as brilliant and courageous as 
Frederick Douglass, but for other important reasons as well. 
If you grow up in a household where there are books, where 
you are read to, where parents, siblings, aunts, uncles and cousins 
read for their own pleasure, naturally you learn to read. If no one 
close to you takes joy in reading, where is the evidence that it's 
worth the effort? If the quality of education available to you is 
inadequate, if you're taught rote memorization rather than how to 
think, if the content of what you're first given to read comes from 
a nearly alien culture, literacy can be a rocky road. 
You have to internalize, so they're second nature, dozens of 
upper- and lower-case letters, symbols and punctuation marks; 
memorize thousands of dumb spellings on a word-by-word basis; 
and conform to a range of rigid and arbitrary rules of grammar. If 
you're preoccupied by the absence of basic family support or 
dropped into a roiling sea of anger, neglect, exploitation, danger 
and self-hatred, you might well conclude that reading takes too 
much work and just isn't worth the trouble. If you're repeatedly 
given the message that you're too stupid to learn (or, the 
functional equivalent, too cool to learn), and if there's no one 
there to contradict it, you might very well buy this pernicious 
advice. There are always some children - like Frederick Bailey -
who beat the odds. Too many don't. 
But, beyond all this, there's a particularly insidious way in 
which, if you're poor, you may have another strike against you in 
your effort to read - and even to think. 
Ann Druyan and I come from families that knew grinding 
poverty. But our parents were passionate readers. One of our 
grandmothers learned to read because her father, a subsistence 
farmer, traded a sack of onions to an itinerant teacher. She read 
for the next hundred years. Our parents had personal hygiene and 
the germ theory of disease drummed into them by the New York 
Public Schools. They followed prescriptions on childhood nutri-
tion recommended by the US Department of Agriculture as if 
337 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
they had been handed down from Mount Sinai. Our government 
book on children's health had been repeatedly taped together as 
its pages fell out. The corners were tattered. Key advice was 
underlined. It was consulted in every medical crisis. For a while, 
my parents gave up smoking - one of the few pleasures available 
to them in the Depression years - so that their infant could have 
vitamin and mineral supplements. Ann and I were very lucky. 
Recent research shows that many children without enough to 
eat wind up with diminished capacity to understand and learn 
('cognitive impairment'). Children don't have to be starving for 
this to happen. Even mild undernourishment, the kind most 
common among poor people in America, can do it. This can 
happen before the baby is born (if the mother isn't eating 
enough), in infancy or in childhood. When there isn't enough 
food, the body has to decide how to invest the limited foodstuffs 
available. Survival comes first. Growth comes second. In this 
nutritional triage, the body seems obliged to rank learning last. 
Better to be stupid and alive, it judges, than smart and dead. 
Instead of showing an enthusiasm, a zest for learning as most 
healthy youngsters do, the undernourished child becomes bored, 
apathetic, unresponsive. More severe malnutrition leads to lower 
birth weights and, in its most extreme forms, smaller brains. 
However, even a child who looks perfectly healthy but has not 
enough iron, say, suffers an immediate decline in the ability to 
concentrate. Iron-deficiency anaemia may affect as much as a 
quarter of all low-income children in America; it attacks the 
child's attention span and memory, and may have consequences 
reaching well into adulthood. 
What once was considered relatively mild undernutrition is now 
understood to be potentially associated with lifelong cognitive 
impairment. Children who are undernourished even on a short-
term basis have a diminished capacity to learn. And millions of 
American children go hungry every week. Lead poisoning, which 
is endemic in inner cities, also causes serious learning deficits. By 
many criteria, the prevalence of poverty in America has been 
steadily increasing since the early 1980s. Almost a quarter of 
American children now live in poverty - the highest rate of 
childhood poverty in the industrialized world. According to one 
338 


The Path to Freedom 
estimate, between 1980 and 1985 alone more American infants 
and children died of preventable disease, malnutrition and other 
consequences of dire poverty than all American battle deaths 
during the Vietnam War. 
Some programmes wisely instituted on the Federal or state level 
in America deal with malnutrition. The Special Supplemental 
Food Program for Women, Infants and Children (WIC), school 
breakfast and lunch programmes, the Summer Food Service 
Program - all have been shown to work, although they do not get 
to all the people who need them. So rich a country is well able to 
provide enough food for all its children. 
Some deleterious effects of undernutrition can be undone; 
iron-repletion therapy, for example, can repair some conse-
quences of iron-deficiency anaemia. But not all of the damage is 
reversible. Dyslexia - various disorders that impair reading skills -
may affect fifteen per cent of us or more, rich and poor alike. Its 
causes (whether biological, psychological or environmental) are 
often undetermined. But methods now exist to help many with 
dyslexia to learn to read. 
No one should be unable to learn to read because education is 
unavailable. But there are many schools in America in which 
reading is taught as a tedious and reluctant excursion into the 
hieroglyphics of an unknown civilization, and many classrooms in 
which not a single book can be found. Sadly, the demand for adult 
literacy classes far outweighs the supply. High-quality early educa-
tion programmes such as Head Start can be enormously successful 
in preparing children for reading. But Head Start reaches only a 
third to a quarter of eligible pre-schoolers, many of its pro-
grammes have been enfeebled by cuts in funding, and it and the 
nutrition programmes mentioned are under renewed Congres-
sional attack as I write. 
Head Start is criticized in a 1994 book called The Bell Curve by 
Richard J. Herrnstein and Charles Murray. Their argument has been 
characterized by Gerald Coles of the University of Rochester: 
First, inadequately fund a program for poor children, then 
deny whatever success is achieved in the face of over-
whelming obstacles, and finally conclude that the program 
339 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
must be eliminated because the children are intellectually 
inferior. 
The book, which received surprisingly respectful attention from 
the media, concludes that there is an irreducible hereditary gap 
between blacks and whites - about 10 or 15 points on IQ tests. In a 
review, the psychologist Leon J. Kamin concludes that '[t]he 
authors repeatedly fail to distinguish between correlation and 
causation' - one of the fallacies of our baloney detection kit. 
The National Center for Family Literacy, based in Louisville, 
Kentucky, has been implementing programmes aimed at low-
income families to teach both children and their parents to read. It 
works like this: the child, 3 to 4 years old, attends school three 
days a week along with a parent, or possibly a grandparent or 
guardian. While the grown-up spends the morning learning basic 
academic skills, the child is in a preschool class. Parent and child 
meet for lunch and then 'learn how to learn together' for the rest 
of the afternoon. 
A follow-up study of fourteen such programmes in three states 
revealed: (1) although all of the children had been designated as 
being at risk for school failure as pre-schoolers, only ten per cent 
were still rated at risk by their current elementary school teachers. 
(2) More than 90 per cent were considered by their current 
elementary school teachers as motivated to learn. (3) Not one of 
the children had to repeat any grade in elementary school. 
The growth of the parents was no less dramatic. When asked to 
describe how their lives had changed as a result of the family 
literacy programme, typical responses described improved self-
confidence (nearly every participant) and self-control, passing 
high-school equivalency exams, admission to college, new jobs, 
and much better relations with their children. The children are 
described as more attentive to parents, eager to learn and - in 
some cases for the first time - hopeful about the future. Such 
programmes could also be used in later grades for teaching 
mathematics, science and much else. 
Tyrants and autocrats have always understood that literacy, 
learning, books and newspapers are potentially dangerous. They 
340 


The Path to Freedom 
can put independent and even rebellious ideas in the heads of 
their subjects. The British Royal Governor of the Colony of 
Virginia wrote in 1671: 
I thank God there are no free schools nor printing; and I hope 
we shall not have [them] these [next] hundred years; for 
learning has brought disobedience, and heresy, and sects into 
the world, and printing has divulged them and libels against 
the best government. God keep us from both! 
But the American colonists, understanding where liberty lies, 
would have none of this. 
In its early years, the United States boasted one of the highest -
perhaps the highest - literacy rates in the world. (Of course, slaves 
and women didn't count in those days.) As early as 1635, there 
had been public schools in Massachusetts, and by 1647 compul-
sory education in all townships there of more than fifty 'house-
holds'. By the next century and a half, educational democracy had 
spread all over the country. Political theorists came from other 
countries to witness this national wonder: vast numbers of ordi-
nary working people who could read and write. The American 
devotion to education for all propelled discovery and invention, a 
vigorous democratic process, and an upward mobility that 
pumped the nation's economic vitality. 
Today, the United States is not the world leader in literacy. Many 
of those judged literate are unable to read and understand very 
simple material - much less a sixth-grade textbook, an instruction 
manual, a bus schedule, a mortgage statement, or a ballot initiative. 
And the sixth-grade textbooks of today are much less challenging 
than those of a few decades ago, while the literacy requirements at 
the workplace have become more demanding than ever before. 
The gears of poverty, ignorance, hopelessness and low self-
esteem mesh to create a kind of perpetual failure machine that 
grinds down dreams from generation to generation. We all bear 
the cost of keeping it running. Illiteracy is its linchpin. 
Even if we hardened our hearts to the shame and misery 
experienced by the victims, the cost of illiteracy to everyone else is 
341 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
severe - the cost in medical expenses and hospitalization, the cost 
in crime and prisons, the cost in special education, the cost in lost 
productivity and in potentially brilliant minds who could help 
solve the dilemmas besetting us. 
Frederick Douglass taught that literacy is the path from slavery 
to freedom. There are many kinds of slavery and many kinds of 
freedom. But reading is still the path. 
Frederick Douglass After the Escape 
hen he was barely twenty, he ran away to freedom. 
Settling in New Bedford with his bride, Anna Murray, 
he worked as a common labourer. Four years later Douglass 
was invited to address a meeting. By that time, in the North, 
it was not unusual to hear the great orators of the day - the 
white ones, that is - railing against slavery. But even many of 
those opposed to slavery thought of the slaves themselves as 
somehow less than human. On the night of 16 August 1841, 
on the small island of Nantucket, the members of the mostly 
Quaker Massachusetts Anti-Slavery Society leaned forward 
in their chairs to hear something new: a voice raised in 
opposition to slavery by someone who knew it from bitter 
personal experience. 
His very appearance and demeanour destroyed the then-
prevalent myth of the 'natural servility' of African-Americans. 
By all accounts his eloquent analysis of the evils of slavery was 
one of the most brilliant debuts in American oratorical history. 
William Lloyd Garrison, the leading abolitionist of the day, sat 
in the front row. When Douglass finished his speech, Garrison 
rose, turned to the stunned audience, and challenged them with 
a shouted question: 'Have we been listening to a thing, a chattel 
personal, or a man?' 
'A man! A man!' the audience roared back as one voice. 
342 
w 


The Path to Freedom 
'Shall such a man be held a slave in a Christian land?' called 
out Garrison. 
'No! No!' shouted the audience. 
And even louder, Garrison asked: 'Shall such a man ever be 
sent back to bondage from the free soil of Old Massachusetts?' 
And now the crowd was on its feet, crying out 'No! No! No!' 
He never did return to slavery. Instead, as an author, editor 
and publisher of journals, as a speaker in America and abroad, 
and as the first African-American to occupy a high advisory 
position in the US government, he spent the rest of his life 
fighting for human rights. During the Civil War, he was a 
consultant to President Lincoln. Douglass successfully advo-
cated the arming of ex-slaves to fight for the North, Federal 
retaliation against Confederate prisoners-of-war for Confeder-
ate summary execution of captured African-American soldiers, 
and freedom for the slaves as a principal objective of the war. 
Many of his opinions were scathing, and ill-designed to win 
him friends in high places: 
I assert most unhesitatingly, that the religion of the 
South is a mere covering for the most horrid crimes - a 
justifier of the most appalling barbarity, a sanctifier of 
the most hateful frauds, and a dark shelter under 
which the darkest, foulest, grossest, and most infernal 
deeds of slaveholders find the strongest protection. 
Were I to be again reduced to the chains of slavery, 
next to that enslavement, I should regard being the 
slave of a religious master the greatest calamity that 
could befall me . . . I . . . hate the corrupt, slavehold-
ing, women-whipping, cradle-plundering, partial and 
hypocritical Christianity of this land. 
Compared to some of the religiously inspired racist rhetoric of 
that time and later, Douglass's comments do not seem hyper-
bolic. 'Slavery is of God' they used to say in antebellum times. 
As one of many loathsome post-Civil War examples, Charles 
Carroll's The Negro a Beast (American Book and Bible House) 
taught its pious readers that 'the Bible and Divine Revelation, 
343 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
as well as reason, all teach that the Negro is not human'. In 
more modern times, some racists still reject the plain testimony 
written in the DNA that all the races are not only human but 
nearly indistinguishable with appeals to the Bible as an 'impreg-
nable bulwark' against even examining the evidence. 
It is worth noting, though, that much of the abolitionist 
ferment arose out of Christian, especially Quaker, communi-
ties of the North; that the traditional black Southern Chris-
tian churches played a key role in the historic American civil 
rights struggle of the 1960s; and that many of its leaders -
most notably Martin Luther King, Jr. - were ministers 
ordained in those churches. 
Douglass addressed the white community in these words: 
[Slavery] fetters your progress, it is the enemy of 
improvement; the deadly foe of education; it fosters 
pride; it breeds indolence; it promotes vice; it shelters 
crime; it is a curse of the earth that supports it, and yet 
you cling to it as if it were the sheet anchor of all your 
hopes. 
In 1843, on a speaking tour of Ireland shortly before the potato 
famine, he was moved by the dire poverty there to write home 
to Garrison: 'I see much here to remind me of my former 
condition, and I confess I should be ashamed to lift my voice 
against American slavery, but that I know the cause of human-
ity is one the world over.' He was outspoken in opposition to the 
policy of extermination of the Native Americans. And in 1848, 
at the Seneca Falls Convention, when Elizabeth Cady Stanton* 
had the nerve to call for an effort to secure the vote for women, 
he was the only man of any ethnic group to stand in support. 
On the night of 20 February 1895 - more than thirty years 
after Emancipation - following an appearance at a women's 
rights rally with Susan B. Anthony, he collapsed and died, a 
true American hero. 
* Years later, she wrote of the Bible in words reminiscent of Douglass's: 'I know 
of no other books that so fully teach the subjection and degradation of women.' 
344 


22 
Significance Junkies 
We also know how cruel the truth often is, and we wonder 
whether delusion is not more consoling. 
Henri Poincare (1854-1912) 
I
hope no one will consider me unduly cynical if I assert that a 
good first-order model of how commercial and public television 
programming work is simply this: money is everything. In prime 
time, a single rating point difference is worth millions of dollars in 
advertising. Especially since the early 1980s, television has 
become almost entirely profit-motivated. You can see this, say, in 
the decline of network news and news specials, or in the pathetic 
evasions that the major networks offered to circumvent a Federal 
Communications Commission mandate that they improve the 
level of children's programming. (For example, educational vir-
tues were asserted for a cartoon series that systematically misrep-
resents the technology and lifestyles of our Pleistocene ancestors, 
and that portrays dinosaurs as pets.) As I write, public television 
in America is in real danger of losing government support, and the 
content of commercial programming is in the course of a steep, 
long-term dumbing down. 
In this perspective, fighting for more real science on television 
seems naive and forlorn. But owners of networks and television 
producers have children and grandchildren about whose future 
they rightly worry. They must feel some responsibility for the 
345 
