THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
future of their nation. There is evidence that science programming 
can be successful, and that people hunger for more of it. I remain 
hopeful that sooner or later we'll see real science skilfully and 
appealingly presented as regular fare on major network television 
worldwide. 
Baseball and soccer have Aztec antecedents. Football is a thinly 
disguised re-enactment of hunting; we played it before we were 
human. Lacrosse is an ancient Native American game, and 
hockey is related to it. But basketball is new. We've been making 
movies longer than we've been playing basketball. 
At first, they didn't think to make a hole in the peach basket so 
the ball could be retrieved without climbing a flight of stairs. But 
in the brief time since then, the game has evolved. In the hands 
mainly of African-American players, basketball has become - at 
its best - the paramount synthesis in sport of intelligence, preci-
sion, courage, audacity, anticipation, artifice, teamwork, elegance 
and grace. 
Five-foot-three-inch Muggsy Bogues negotiates a forest of 
giants: Michael Jordan sails in from some outer darkness 
beyond the free-throw line; Larry Bird threads a precise, 
no-look pass; Kareem Abdul-Jabbar unleashes a skyhook. This 
is not fundamentally a contact sport like football. It's a game of 
finesse. The full-court press, passes out of the double-team, the 
pick-and-roll, cutting off the passing lanes, a tip-in from a 
high-flying forward soaring from out of nowhere all constitute a 
coordination of intellect and athleticism, a harmony of mind 
and body. It's not surprising that the game has caught fire in 
America. 
Ever since National Basketball Association games became a 
television staple, it's seemed to me that it could be used to teach 
science and mathematics. To appreciate a free-throw average of 
0.926, you must know something about converting fractions into 
decimals. A lay-up is Newton's first law of motion in action. Every 
shot represents the launching of a basketball on a parabolic arc, a 
curve determined by the same gravitational physics that specifies 
the flight of a ballistic missile, or the Earth orbiting the Sun, or a 
spacecraft on its rendezvous with some distant world. The centre 


Significance Junkies 
of mass of the player's body during a slam dunk is briefly in orbit 
about the centre of the Earth. 
To get the ball in the basket, you must loft it at exactly the right 
speed; a one per cent error and gravity will make you look bad. 
Three-point shooters, whether they know it or not, compensate 
for aerodynamic drag. Each successive bounce of a dropped 
basketball is nearer to the ground because of the Second Law of 
Thermodynamics. Daryl Dawkins or Shaquille O'Neal shattering 
a backboard is an opportunity for teaching - among some other 
things - the propagation of shock waves. A spin shot off the glass 
from under the backboard goes in because of the conservation of 
angular momentum. It's an infraction of the rules to touch the 
basketball in 'the cylinder' above the basket; we're now talking 
about a key mathematical idea: generating n-dimensional objects 
by moving (n - l)-dimensional objects. 
In the classroom, in newspapers and on television, why aren't 
we using sports to teach science? 
When I was growing up, my father would bring home a daily 
paper and consume (often with great gusto) the baseball box 
scores. There they were, to me dry as dust, with obscure abbrevia-
tions (W, SS, K, W-L, AB, RBI), but they spoke to him. 
Newspapers everywhere printed them. I figured maybe they 
weren't too hard for me. Eventually I too got caught up in the 
world of baseball statistics. (I know it helped me in learning 
decimals, and I still cringe a little when I hear, usually at the very 
beginning of the baseball season, that someone's 'batting a 
thousand'. But 1.000 is not 1,000. The lucky player is batting one.) 
Or take a look at the financial pages. Any introductory mate-
rial? 
Explanatory 
footnotes? 
Definitions of abbreviations? 
Almost none. It's sink or swim. Look at those acres of statistics! 
Yet people voluntarily read the stuff. It's not beyond their ability. 
It's only a matter of motivation. Why can't we do the same with 
maths, science and technology? 
In every sport the players seem to perform in streaks. In basket-
ball it's called the hot hand. You can do no wrong. I remember a 
play-off game in which Michael Jordan, not ordinarily a superb 
long-range shooter, was effortlessly making so many consecutive 
347 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
three-point baskets from all over the floor that he shrugged his 
shoulders in amazement at himself. In contrast, there are times 
when you're cold, when nothing goes in. When a player is in the 
groove he seems to be tapping into some mysterious power, and 
when ice-cold he's under some kind of jinx or spell. But this is 
magical, not scientific thinking. 
Streakiness, far from being remarkable, is expected, even for 
random events. What would be amazing would be no streaks. If I 
flip a penny ten times in a row, I might get this sequence of heads 
and tails: H H H T H T H H H H . Eight heads out of ten, and four 
in a row! Was I exercising some psychokinetic control over my 
penny? Was I in a heads groove? It looks much too regular to be 
due to chance. 
But then I remember that I was flipping before and after I got 
this run of heads, that it's embedded in a much longer and less 
interesting sequence: H H T H T T H H H T H T H H H H T H T 
T H T H T T. If I'm permitted to pay attention to some results and 
ignore others, I'll always be able to 'prove' there's something 
exceptional about my streak. This is one of the fallacies in the 
baloney detection kit, the enumeration of favourable circum-
stances. We remember the hits and forget the misses. If your 
ordinary field goal shooting percentage is 50 per cent and you 
can't improve your statistics by an effort of will, you're exactly as 
likely to have a hot hand in basketball as I am in coin-flipping. As 
often as I get eight out of ten heads, you'll get eight out of ten 
baskets. Basketball can teach something about probability and 
statistics, as well as critical thinking. 
An investigation by my colleague Tom Gilovich, professor of 
psychology at Cornell, shows persuasively that our ordinary 
understanding of the basketball streak is a misperception. 
Gilovich studied whether shots made by NBA players tend to 
cluster more than you'd expect by chance. After making one or 
two or three baskets, players were no more likely to succeed than 
after a missed basket. This was true for the great and the 
near-great, not only for field goals but for free throws - where 
there's no hand in your face. (Of course some attenuation of 
shooting streaks can be attributed to increased attention by the 
defence to the player with the 'hot hand'.) In baseball, there's the 
348 


Significance Junkies 
related but contrary myth that someone batting below his average 
is 'due' to make a hit. This is no more true than that a few heads in 
a row makes the chance of flipping tails next time anything other 
than 50 per cent. If there are streaks beyond what you'd expect 
statistically, they're hard to find. 
But somehow this doesn't satisfy. It doesn't feel true. Ask the 
players, or the coaches, or the fans. We seek meaning, even in 
random numbers. We're significance junkies. When the cel-
ebrated coach Red Auerbach heard of Gilovich's study, his 
response was: 'Who is this guy? So he makes a study. I couldn't 
care less.' And you know exactly how he feels. But if basketball 
streaks don't show up more often than sequences of heads or tails, 
there's nothing magical about them. Does this reduce players to 
mere marionettes, manipulated by the laws of chance? Certainly 
not. Their average shooting percentages are a true reflection of 
their personal skills. This is only about the frequency and duration 
of streaks. 
Of course, it's much more fun to think that the gods have 
touched the player who's on a streak and scorned the one with a 
cold hand. So what? What's the harm of a little mystification? It 
sure beats boring statistical analyses. In basketball, in sports, no 
harm. But as a habitual way of thinking, it gets us into trouble in 
some of the other games we like to play. 
'Scientist, yes; mad, no' giggles the mad scientist on 'Gilligan's 
Island' as he adjusts the electronic device that permits him to 
control the minds of others for his own nefarious purpose. 
'I'm sorry, Dr Nerdnik, the people of Earth will not appreciate 
being shrunk to three inches high, even if it will save room and 
energy . . .' The cartoon superhero is patiently explaining an 
ethical dilemma to the typical scientist portrayed on Saturday-
morning children's television. 
Many of these so-called scientists - judging from the pro-
grammes I've seen (and plausible inference about ones I 
haven't, such as the Mad Scientist's 'Toon Club) - are moral 
cripples driven by a lust for power or endowed with a spectacu-
lar insensitivity to the feelings of others. The message conveyed 
to the moppet audience is that science is dangerous and 
349 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
scientists worse than weird: they're crazed. 
The applications of science, of course, can be dangerous, and, 
as I've tried to stress, virtually every major technological advance 
in the history of the human species - back to the invention of stone 
tools and the domestication of fire - has been ethically ambiguous. 
These advances can be used by ignorant or evil people for 
dangerous purposes or by wise and good people for the benefit of 
the human species. But only one side of the ambiguity ever seems 
to be presented in these offerings to our children. 
Where in these programmes are the joys of science? The 
delights in discovering how the universe is put together? The 
exhilaration in knowing a deep thing well? What about the crucial 
contributions that science and technology have made to human 
welfare, or the billions of lives saved or made possible by medical 
and agricultural technology? (In fairness, though, I should men-
tion that the Professor in 'Gilligan's Island' often used his knowledge 
of science to solve practical problems for the castaways.) 
We live in a complex age where many of the problems we face 
can, whatever their origins, only have solutions that involve a 
deep understanding of science and technology. Modern society 
desperately needs the finest minds available to devise solutions to 
these problems. I do not think that many gifted youngsters will be 
encouraged towards a career in science or engineering by watch-
ing Saturday-morning television - or much of the rest of the 
available American video menu. 
Over the years, a profusion of credulous, uncritical TV series 
and 'specials' - on ESP, channelling, the Bermuda Triangle, 
UFOs, ancient astronauts, Big Foot, and the like - have been 
spawned. The style-setting series 'In Search of . . .' begins with a 
disclaimer disavowing any responsibility to present a balanced 
view of the subject. You can see a thirst for wonder here 
untempered by even rudimentary scientific scepticism. Pretty 
much whatever anyone says on camera is true. The idea that there 
might be alternative explanations to be decided among by the 
weight of evidence never surfaces. The same is true of 'Sightings' 
and 'Unsolved Mysteries' - in which, as the very title suggests, 
prosaic solutions are unwelcome - and innumerable other clones. 
'In Search of . . .' frequently takes an intrinsically interesting 
350 


Significance Junkies 
subject and systematically distorts the evidence. If there is a 
mundane scientific explanation and one which requires the most 
extravagant paranormal or psychic explanation, you can be sure 
which will be highlighted. An almost random example: an author 
is presented who argues that a major planet lies beyond Pluto. His 
evidence is cylinder seals from ancient Sumer, carved long before 
the invention of the telescope. His views are increasingly accepted 
by professional astronomers, he says. Not a word is mentioned of 
the failure of astronomers - studying the motions of Neptune, 
Pluto and the four spacecraft beyond - to find a trace of the 
alleged planet. 
The graphics are indiscriminate. When an offscreen narrator is 
talking about dinosaurs, we see a woolly mammoth. The narrator 
describes a hovercraft; the screen shows a shuttle liftoff. We hear 
about lakes and flood plains, but are shown mountains. It doesn't 
matter. The visuals are as indifferent to the facts as is the voice-over. 
A series called 'The X Files', which pays lip-service to sceptical 
examination of the paranormal, is skewed heavily towards the 
reality of alien abductions, strange powers and government com-
plicity in covering up just about everything interesting. Almost 
never does the paranormal claim turn out to be a hoax or a 
psychological aberration or a misunderstanding of the natural 
world. Much closer to reality, as well as a much greater public 
service, would be an adult series ('Scooby Doo' does it for children) 
in which paranormal claims are systematically investigated and 
every case is found to be explicable in prosaic terms. The dramatic 
tension would be in uncovering how misapprehension and hoax 
could generate apparently genuine paranormal phenomena. Per-
haps one of the investigators would always be disappointed, hoping 
that next time an unambiguously paranormal case will survive 
sceptical scrutiny. 
Other shortcomings are evident in television science fiction 
programming. 'Star Trek', for example, despite its charm and 
strong international and interspecies perspective, often ignores 
the most elementary scientific facts. The idea that Mr Spock could 
be a cross between a human being and a life form independently 
evolved on the planet Vulcan is genetically far less probable than a 
successful cross of a man and an artichoke. The idea does, 
351 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
however, provide a precedent in popular culture for the 
extraterrestrial/human hybrids that later became so central a 
component of the alien abduction story. There must be dozens of 
alien species on the various 'Star Trek' TV series and movies. 
Almost all we spend any time with are minor variants of humans. 
This is driven by economic necessity, costing only an actor and a 
latex mask, but it flies in the face of the stochastic nature of the 
evolutionary process. If there are aliens, almost all of them I think 
will look devastatingly less human than Klingons and Romulans 
(and be at widely different levels of technology). 'Star Trek' 
doesn't come to grips with evolution. 
In many TV programmes and films, even the casual science -
the throwaway lines that are not essential to a plot already 
innocent of science - is done incompetently. It costs very little to 
hire a graduate student to read the script for scientific accuracy. 
But, so far as I can tell, this is almost never done. As a result we 
have such howlers as 'parsec' mentioned as a unit of speed instead 
of distance in the - in many other ways exemplary - film Star 
Wars. If such things were done with a modicum of care, they 
might even improve the plot; certainly, they might help convey a 
little science to a mass audience. 
There's a great deal of pseudoscience for the gullible on TV, 
a fair amount of medicine and technology, but hardly any 
science, especially on the big commercial networks, whose 
executives tend to think that science programming means 
ratings declines and lost profits, and nothing else matters. 
There are network employees with the title 'Science Corre-
spondent', and an occasional news feature said to be devoted to 
science. But we almost never hear any science from them, just 
medicine and technology. In all the networks, I doubt if there's 
a single employee whose job it is to read each week's issue of 
Nature or Science to see if anything newsworthy has been 
discovered. When the Nobel Prizes in science are announced 
each fall, there's a superb news 'hook' for science: a chance to 
explain what the prizes were given for. But, almost always, all 
we hear is something like '. . . may one day lead to a cure for 
cancer. Today in Belgrade . . .' 
How much science is there on the radio or television talk shows, 
352 


Significance Junkies 
or on those dreary Sunday morning programmes in which middle-
aged white people sit around agreeing with each other? When is 
the last time you heard an intelligent comment on science by a 
President of the United States? Why in all America is there no TV 
drama that has as its hero someone devoted to figuring out how 
the Universe works? When a highly publicized murder trial has 
everyone casually mentioning DNA testing, where are the prime-
time network specials devoted to nucleic acids and heredity? I 
can't even recall seeing an accurate and comprehensible descrip-
tion on television of how television works. 
By far the most effective means of raising interest in science is 
television. But this enormously powerful medium is doing close to 
nothing to convey the joys and methods of science, while its 'mad 
scientist' engine continues to huff and puff away. 
In American polls in the early 1990s, two-thirds of all adults had 
no idea what the 'information superhighway' was; 42 per cent 
didn't know where Japan is; and 38 per cent were ignorant of the 
term 'holocaust'. But the proportion was in the high 90s who had 
heard of the Menendez, Bobbit and O.J. Simpson criminal cases; 
99 per cent had heard that the singer Michael Jackson had 
allegedly sexually molested a boy. The United States may be the 
best-entertained nation on Earth, but a steep price is being paid. 
Surveys in Canada and the United States in the same period 
show that television viewers wish there were more science pro-
gramming. In North America, often there's a good science 
programme in the 'Nova' series of the Public Broadcasting 
System, and occasionally on the Discovery or Learning Channels, 
or the Canadian Broadcasting Company. Bill Nye's 'The Science 
Guy' programmes for young children on PBS are fast-paced, 
feature arresting graphics, range over many realms of science, and 
sometimes even illuminate the process of discovery. But the depth 
of public interest in science engrossingly and accurately presented 
- to say nothing of the immense good that would result from 
better public understanding of science - is not yet reflected in 
network programming. 
How could we put more science on television? Here are some 
possibilities: 
353 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
• The wonders and methods of science routinely presented on 
news and talk programmes. There's real human drama in the 
process of discovery. 
• A series called 'Solved Mysteries', in which tremulous specula-
tions have rational resolutions, including puzzling cases in 
forensic medicine and epidemiology. 
• 'Ring My Bells Again' - a series in which we relive the media 
and the public falling hook, line and sinker for a coordinated 
government lie. The first two episodes might be the Bay of 
Tonkin 'incident' and the systematic irradiation of unsuspecting 
and unprotected American civilians and military personnel in 
the alleged requirements of 'national defence' following 1945. 
• A separate series on fundamental misunderstandings and mis-
takes made by famous scientists, national leaders and religious 
figures. 
• Regular exposes of pernicious pseudoscience, and audience-
participation 'how-to' programmes: how to bend spoons, read 
minds, appear to foretell the future, perform psychic surgery, 
do cold reads, and press the TV viewers' personal buttons. 
How we're bamboozled: learn by doing. 
• A state-of-the-art computer graphics facility to prepare in advance 
scientific visuals for a wide range of news contingencies. 
• A set of inexpensive televised debates, each perhaps an hour 
long, with a computer graphics budget for each side provided 
by the producers, rigorous standards of evidence required by 
the moderator, and the widest range of topics broached. They 
could address issues where the scientific evidence is over-
whelming, as on the matter of the shape of the Earth; contro-
versial matters where the answer is less clear, such as the 
survival of one's personality after death, or abortion, or animal 
rights, or genetic engineering; or any of the presumptive 
pseudosciences mentioned in this book. 
There is a pressing national need for more public knowledge of 
science. Television cannot provide it all by itself. But if we want to 
make short-term improvements in the understanding of science, 
television is the place to start. 
354 


23 
Maxwell and The Nerds 
Why should we subsidize intellectual curiosity? 
Ronald Reagan, 
campaign speech, 1980 
There is nothing which can better deserve our patronage 
than the promotion of science and literature. Knowledge is 
in every country the surest basis of public happiness. 
George Washington, 
address to Congress, 8 January 1790 
S
tereotypes abound. Ethnic groups are stereotyped, the citizens 
of other nations and religions are stereotyped, the genders and 
sexual preferences are stereotyped, people born in various times 
of the year are stereotyped (Sun-sign astrology), and occupations 
are stereotyped. The most generous interpretation ascribes it to a 
kind of intellectual laziness: instead of judging people on their 
individual merits and deficits, we concentrate on one or two bits of 
information about them, and then place them in a small number of 
previously constructed pigeonholes. 
This saves the trouble of thinking, at the price in many cases of 
committing a profound injustice. It also shields the stereotyper 
from contact with the enormous variety of people, the multiplicity 
of ways of being human. Even if stereotyping were valid on 
average, it is bound to fail in many individual cases: human 
355 
