THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
reliably reported cases that are unexotic, and exotic cases that are 
unreliable. There are no cases - despite well over a million UFO 
reports since 1947 - in which something so strange that it could 
only be an extraterrestrial spacecraft is reported so reliably that 
misapprehension, hoax or hallucination can be reliably excluded. 
There's still a part of me that says, 'Too bad.' 
We're regularly bombarded with extravagant UFO claims 
vended in bite-sized packages, but only rarely do we get to hear 
about their comeuppance. This isn't hard to understand: which 
sells more newspapers and books, which garners higher ratings, 
which is more fun to believe, which is more resonant with the 
torments of our time - real crashed alien ships, or experienced con 
men preying on the gullible; extraterrestrials of immense powers 
toying with the human species, or such claims deriving from 
human weakness and imperfection? 
Over the years I've continued to spend time on the UFO 
problem. I receive many letters about it, frequently with detailed 
first-hand accounts. Sometimes momentous revelations are prom-
ised if only I will call the letter writer. After I give lectures - on 
almost any subject - I often am asked, 'Do you believe in UFOs?' 
I'm always struck by how the question is phrased, the suggestion 
that this is a matter of belief and not of evidence. I'm almost never 
asked, 'How good is the evidence that UFOs are alien space-
ships?' 
I've found that the going-in attitude of many people is highly 
predetermined. Some are convinced that eyewitness testimony is 
reliable, that people do not make things up, that hallucinations or 
hoaxes on such a scale are impossible, and that there must be a 
long-standing, high-level government conspiracy to keep the truth 
from the rest of us. Gullibility about UFOs thrives on widespread 
mistrust of government, arising naturally enough from all those 
circumstances where, in the tension between public well-being 
and 'national security', the government lies. As government 
deceit and conspiracies of silence have been exposed on so many 
other matters, it's hard to argue that a cover-up on this odd 
subject is impossible, that the government would never hide 
important information from its citizens. A common explanation 
on why there would be a cover-up is to prevent worldwide panic or 
78 


Spoofing and Secrecy 
erosion of confidence in the government. 
I was a member of the US Air Force Scientific Advisory Board 
committee that investigated the Air Force's UFO study - called 
'Project Bluebook', but earlier and revealingly called 'Project 
Grudge'. We found the on-going effort to be lackadaisical and 
dismissive. In the middle 1960s, 'Project Bluebook' was headquar-
tered at Wright-Patterson Air Force Base in Ohio, where 'Foreign 
Technical Intelligence' (chiefly, understanding what new weapons 
the Soviets had) was also based. They had state-of-the-art technol-
ogy in file retrieval. You asked about a given UFO incident and, 
somewhat like sweaters and suits at the dry cleaner's today, reams 
of files made their way past you, until the engine stopped when 
the file you wanted arrived before you. 
But what was in those files wasn't worth much. For example, 
senior citizens reported lights hovering over their small New 
Hampshire town for more than an hour, and the case is explained 
as a wing of strategic bombers from a nearby Air Force base on a 
training exercise. Could the bombers take an hour to pass over the 
town? No. Did the bombers fly over at the time the UFOs were 
reported? No. Can you explain to us, Colonel, how strategic 
bombers can be described as 'hovering'? No. The slipshod Blue-
book investigations played little scientific role, but they did serve 
the important bureaucratic purpose of convincing much of the 
public that the Air Force was on the job; and that maybe there 
was nothing to UFO reports. 
Of course, this doesn't preclude the possibility that another, 
more serious, more scientific study of UFOs was going on 
somewhere else, headed, say, by a brigadier general rather than a 
lieutenant colonel. I think something like this is even likely, not 
because I believe we're being visited by aliens, but because hiding 
in the UFO phenomena must be data once considered of signifi-
cant military interest. Certainly if UFOs are as reported - very 
fast, very manoeuvrable craft - there is a military duty to find out 
how they work. If UFOs were built by the Soviet Union it was the 
Air Force's responsibility to protect us. Considering the remark-
able performance characteristics reported, the strategic implica-
tions of Soviet UFOs flagrantly overflying American military and 
nuclear facilities were worrisome. If on the other hand the UFOs 
79 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
were built by extraterrestrials, we might copy the technology (if 
we could get our hands on just one saucer) and secure a huge 
advantage in the Cold War. And even if the military believed that 
UFOs were manufactured neither by Soviets nor by extraterres-
trials, there was a good reason to follow the reports closely. 
In the 1950s balloons were being extensively used by the Air 
Force - not just as weather measurement platforms, as promi-
nently advertised, and radar reflectors, as acknowledged, but 
also, secretly, as robotic espionage craft, with high-resolution 
cameras and signal intelligence devices. While the balloons them-
selves were not very secret, the reconnaissance packages they 
carried were. High-altitude balloons can seem saucer-shaped 
when seen from the ground. If you misestimate how far away they 
are, you can easily imagine them going absurdly fast. Occasion-
ally, propelled by a gust of wind, they make abrupt changes in 
direction, uncharacteristic of aircraft and in seeming defiance of 
the conservation of momentum - if you don't realize they're 
hollow and weigh almost nothing. 
The most famous of these military balloon systems, widely 
tested over the United States in the early 1950s, was called 
'Skyhook'. Other balloon systems and projects were designated 
'Mogul', 'Moby Dick', 'Grandson' and 'Genetrix'. Urner Lidell, 
who had some responsibility for these missions at the Naval 
Research Laboratory, and who was later a NASA official, once 
told me he thought all UFO reports were due to military balloons. 
While 'all' is going too far, their role has, I think, been insuffi-
ciently appreciated. So far as I know there has never been a 
systematic and intentional control experiment, in which high-
altitude balloons were secretly released and tracked, and UFO 
reports from visual and radar observers noted. 
In 1956, overflights of the Soviet Union by US reconnaissance 
balloons began. At their peak there were dozens of balloon 
launches a day. Balloon overflights were then replaced by high-
altitude aircraft, such as the U-2, which in turn were largely 
replaced by reconnaissance satellites. Many UFOs dating from 
this period were clearly scientific balloons, as are some since. 
High-altitude balloons are still being launched, including plat-
forms carrying cosmic ray sensors, optical and infrared telescopes, 
80 


Spoofing and Secrecy 
radio receivers probing the cosmic background radiation, and 
other instruments above most of the Earth's atmosphere. 
A great to-do has been made of one or more alleged crashed 
flying saucers near Roswell, New Mexico, in 1947. Some initial 
reports and newspaper photographs of the incident are entirely 
consistent with the idea that the debris was a crashed high-altitude 
balloon. But other residents of the region - especially decades 
later - remember more exotic materials, enigmatic hieroglyphics, 
threats by military personnel to witnesses if they didn't keep what 
they knew to themselves, and the canonical story that alien 
machinery and body parts were packed into an airplane and flown 
to the Air Materiel Command at Wright-Patterson Air Force 
Base. Some, but not all, of the recovered alien body stories are 
associated with this incident. 
Philip Klass, a long-time and dedicated UFO sceptic, has 
uncovered a subsequently declassified letter dated 27 July 1948, a 
year after the Roswell 'incident', from Major General C.B. 
Cabell, then Director of Intelligence for the US Air Force (and 
later, as a CIA official, a major figure in the abortive US invasion 
of Cuba at the Bay of Pigs). Cabell was inquiring of those who 
reported to him on what UFOs might be. He hadn't a clue. In an 
11 October 1948 summary response, explicitly including informa-
tion in the possession of the Air Materiel Command, we find the 
Director of Intelligence being told that nobody else in the Air 
Force had a clue either. This makes it unlikely that UFO 
fragments and occupants had made their way to Wright-Patterson 
the year before. 
What the Air Force was mostly worried about was that UFOs 
were Russian. Why Russians would be testing flying saucers over 
the United States was a puzzle to which the following four answers 
were proposed: '(1) To negate US confidence in the atom bomb as 
the most advanced and decisive weapon in warfare. (2) To 
perform photographic reconnaissance missions. (3) To test US air 
defenses. (4) To conduct familiarization flights [for strategic 
bombers] over US territory.' We now know that UFOs neither 
were nor are Russian, and however dedicated the Soviet interest 
may have been to objectives (1) through (4), flying saucers 
weren't how they pursued these objectives. 
81 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
Much of the evidence regarding the Roswell 'incident' seems to 
point to a cluster of high-altitude classified balloons, perhaps 
launched from nearby Almagordo Army Air Field or White Sands 
Proving Ground, that crashed near Roswell, the debris of secret 
instruments hurriedly collected by earnest military personnel, 
early press reports announcing that it was a spaceship from 
another planet ('RAAF Captures Flying Saucer on Ranch in 
Roswell Region'), diverse recollections simmering over the years, 
and memories refreshed by the opportunity for a little fame and 
fortune. (Two UFO museums in Roswell are leading tourist 
stops.) 
A 1994 report ordered by the Secretary of the Air Force and the 
Department of Defense in response to prodding from a New 
Mexico Congressman identifies the Roswell debris as remnants of 
a long-range, highly secret, balloon-borne low-frequency acoustic 
detection system called 'Project Mogul' - an attempt to sense 
Soviet nuclear weapons explosions at tropopause altitudes. The 
Air Force investigators, rummaging comprehensively through the 
secret files of 1947, found no evidence of heightened message 
traffic: 
There were no indications and warnings, notice of alerts, or a 
higher tempo of operational activity reported that would be 
logically generated if an alien craft, whose intentions were 
unknown, entered U.S. territory . . . The records indicate 
that none of this happened (or if it did, it was controlled by a 
security system so efficient and tight that no one, U.S. or 
otherwise, has been able to duplicate it since. If such a system 
had been in effect at the time, it would have also been used to 
protect our atomic secrets from the Soviets, which history has 
shown obviously was not the case.) 
The radar targets carried by the balloons were partly manufac-
tured by novelty and toy companies in New York, whose inven-
tory of decorative icons seems to have been remembered many 
years later as alien hieroglyphics. 
The heyday of UFOs corresponds to the time when the main 
delivery vehicle for nuclear weapons was being switched from 
82 


Spoofing and Secrecy 
aircraft to missiles. An early and important technical problem 
concerned re-entry - returning a nuclear-armed nosecone through 
the bulk of the Earth's atmosphere without burning it up in the 
process (as small asteroids and comets are destroyed in their 
passage through the upper air). Certain materials, nosecone 
geometries, and angles of entry are better than others. Observa-
tions of re-entry (or the more spectacular launches) could very 
well reveal US progress in this vital strategic technology or, worse, 
inefficiencies in the design; such observations might suggest what 
defensive measures an adversary should take. Understandably, 
the subject was considered highly sensitive. 
Inevitably there must have been cases in which military person-
nel were told not to talk about what they had seen, or where 
seemingly innocuous sightings were suddenly classified top secret 
with severely constrained need-to-know criteria. Air Force offic-
ers and civilian scientists thinking back about it in later years 
might very well conclude that the government had engineered a 
UFO cover-up. If nosecones are judged UFOs, the charge is a fair 
one. 
Consider spoofing. In the strategic confrontation between the 
United States and the Soviet Union, the adequacy of air defences 
was a vital issue. It was item (3) on General Cabell's list. If you 
could find a weakness, it might be the key to 'victory' in an all-out 
nuclear war. The only sure way to test your adversary's defences is 
to fly an aircraft over their borders and see how long it takes for 
them to notice. The United States did this routinely to test Soviet 
air defences. 
In the 1950s and 1960s, the United States had state-of-the-art 
radar defence systems covering its west and east coasts, and 
especially its northern approaches (over which a Soviet bomber or 
missile attack would most likely come). But there was a soft 
underbelly - no significant early warning system to detect the 
geographically much more taxing southern approach. This is of 
course information vital for a potential adversary. It immediately 
suggests a spoof: one or more of the adversary's high-performance 
aircraft zoom out of the Caribbean, let's say, into US airspace, 
penetrating, let's say, a few hundred miles up the Mississippi 
River until a US air defence radar locks on. Then the intruders 
83 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
hightail it out of there. (Or, as a control experiment, a unit of US 
high-performance aircraft is sequestered and sent in unannounced 
sorties to determine how porous American air defences are.) In 
such a case, there may be combined visual and radar sightings by 
military and civilian observers and large numbers of independent 
reports. What is reported corresponds to no known aircraft. The 
Air Force and civilian aviation authorities truthfully state that 
none of their aircraft was responsible. Even if they've been urging 
Congress to fund a southern Early Warning System, the Air Force 
is unlikely to admit that Soviet or Cuban aircraft got to New 
Orleans, much less Memphis, before anybody caught on. 
Here again, we have every reason to expect a high-level 
technical investigating team, Air Force and civilian observers told 
to keep their mouths shut, and not just the appearance but the 
reality of suppression of the data. Again, this conspiracy of silence 
need have nothing to do with alien spacecraft. Even decades later, 
there are bureaucratic reasons for the Department of Defense to 
be close-mouthed about such embarrassments. There is a poten-
tial conflict of interest between parochial concerns of the Depart-
ment of Defense and the solution of the UFO enigma. 
In addition, something that both the Central Intelligence 
Agency and the US Air Force worried about then was UFOs as a 
means of clogging communication channels in a national crisis, 
and confusing visual and radar sightings of enemy aircraft - a 
signal-to-noise problem that in a way is the flip side of spoofing. 
In view of all this, I'm perfectly prepared to believe that at least 
some UFO reports and analyses, and perhaps voluminous files, 
have been made inaccessible to the public which pays the bills. 
The Cold War is over, the missile and balloon technology is 
largely obsolete or widely available, and those who would be 
embarrassed are no longer on active duty. The worst that would 
happen, from the military's point of view, is that there would be 
one more acknowledged instance of the American public being 
misled or lied to in the interest of national security. It's time for 
the files to be declassified and made generally available. 
Another instructive intersection of the conspiracy tempera-
ment and the secrecy culture concerns the National Security 
Agency. This organization monitors the telephone, radio and 
84 


Spoofing and Secrecy 
other communications of both friends and adversaries of the 
United States. Surreptitiously, it reads the world's mail. Its daily 
intercept traffic is huge. In times of tension, vast arrays of NSA 
personnel fluent in the relevant languages are sitting with ear-
phones, monitoring in real time everything from encrypted com-
mands from the target nation's General Staff to pillow talk. For 
other material there are key words by which computers cull out 
for human attention specific messages or conversations of current 
urgent concern. Everything is stored, so that retrospectively it is 
possible to go back to the magnetic tapes and to trace the first 
appearance of a codeword, say, or command responsibility in a 
crisis. Some of the intercepts are made from listening posts in 
nearby countries (Turkey for Russia, India for China), from 
aircraft and ships patrolling nearby, or from ferret satellites in 
Earth orbit. There is a continuing dance of measures and counter-
measures between the NSA and the security services of other 
nations, who understandably do not wish to be listened in on. 
Now add to this already heady mix the Freedom of Information 
Act (FOIA). A request is made to the NSA for all information it 
has available on UFOs. It is required by law to be responsive, but 
of course without revealing 'methods and sources'. NSA also feels 
a deep obligation not to alert other nations, friends or foes, in an 
obtrusive and politically embarrassing way, to its activities. So a 
more or less typical intercept released by NSA in response to an 
FOIA request will be a third of a page blacked out, a fragment of 
a line saying 'reported a UFO at low altitude', followed by 
two-thirds of a page blacked out. The NSA's position is that 
releasing the rest of the page would potentially compromise 
sources and methods, or at least alert the nation in question to 
how readily its aviation radio traffic is being intercepted. (If NSA 
released surrounding, seemingly bland, aircraft-to-tower trans-
missions, it would then be possible for the nation in question to 
recognize that its military air traffic control dialogues are being 
monitored and to switch to communications means - frequency 
hopping, for example - that make NSA intercepts more difficult.) 
But UFO conspiracy theorists receiving, in response to their 
FOIA requests, dozens of pages of material, almost all of it 
blacked out, understandably deduce that the NSA possesses 
85 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
extensive information on UFOs and is part of a conspiracy of 
silence. 
In talking not for attribution with NSA officials, I am told the 
following story: typical intercepts are of military and civilian 
aircraft radioing that they see a UFO, by which they mean an 
unidentified object in the surrounding airspace. It may even be 
US aircraft on reconnaissance or spoofing missions. In most cases 
it is something much more ordinary, and the clarification is also 
reported on later NSA intercepts. 
Similar logic can be used to make NSA seem a part of any 
conspiracy. For example, they say, a response was required to an 
FOIA request on what the NSA knew about the singer Elvis 
Presley. (Apparitions of Mr Presley and resulting miraculous 
cures have been reported.) Well, the NSA knew a few things. For 
example, a report on the economic health of a certain nation 
reported how many Elvis Presley tapes and CDs were sold there. 
This information also was supplied as a few lines of clear in a vast 
ocean of censorship black. Was NSA engaged in an Elvis Presley 
cover-up? While of course I have not personally investigated 
NSA's UFO-related traffic, their story seems to me very plausible. 
If we are convinced that the government is keeping visits of 
aliens from us, then we should take on the secrecy culture of the 
military and intelligence establishments. At the very least we can 
push for declassification of relevant information from decades 
ago, of which the July 1994 Air Force report on the 'Roswell 
Incident' is a good example. 
You can catch a flavour of the paranoid style of many UFOlo-
gists, as well as a naivete about the secrecy culture, in a book by a 
former New York Times reporter, Howard Blum (Out There, 
Simon and Schuster, 1990): 
I could not, no matter how inventively I tried, avoid slamming 
into sudden dead ends. The whole story was always lingering, 
deliberately, I came to believe, just out of my grasp. 
Why? 
This was the single, practical, impossible question that was 
balanced ominously on the tall peak of my mounting suspi-
cions. Why were all these official spokesmen and institutions 
86 


Spoofing and Secrecy 
doing their collusive best to hinder and obstruct my efforts? 
Why were stories true one day, and false the next? Why all 
the tense, unyielding secretiveness? Why were military intel-
ligence agents spreading disinformation, driving UFO believ-
ers mad? What had the government found out there? What 
was it trying to hide? 
Of course there's resistance. Some information is classified legiti-
mately; as with military hardware, secrecy sometimes really is in 
the national interest. Further, military, political and intelligence 
communities tend to value secrecy for its own sake. It's a way of 
silencing critics and evading responsibility for incompetence or 
worse. It generates an elite, a band of brothers in whom the 
national confidence can be reliably vested, unlike the great mass 
of citizenry on whose behalf the information is presumably made 
secret in the first place. With a few exceptions, secrecy is deeply 
incompatible with democracy and with science. 
One of the most provocative purported intersections of UFOs and 
secrecy are the so-called MJ-12 documents. In late 1984, so the story 
goes, an envelope containing a canister of exposed but undeveloped 
film was thrust into the home mail slot of a film producer, Jaime 
Shandera, interested in UFOs and government cover-up, remark-
ably, just as he was about to go out and have lunch with the author of 
a book on the alleged events in Roswell, New Mexico. When 
developed, it 'proved to be' page after page of a highly classified 
'eyes only' executive order dated 24 September 1947 in which 
President Harry S. Truman seemingly established a committee of 
twelve scientists and government officials to examine a set of crashed 
flying saucers and little alien bodies. The membership of the MJ-12 
committee is remarkable because these are just the military, intelli-
gence, science and engineering people who might have been called to 
investigate such crashes if they had occurred. In the MJ-12 docu-
ments there are tantalizing references to appendices about the nature 
of the aliens, the technology of their ships and so on, but the 
appendices were not included in the mysterious film. 
The Air Force says that the document is bogus. The UFO 
expert Philip J. Klass and others find lexicographic and typo-
graphic inconsistencies that suggest that the whole thing is a hoax. 
87 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
Those who purchase fine art are concerned about the provenance 
of their painting - that is, who owned it most recently and who 
before that . . . and so on all the way back to the original artist. If 
there are breaks in the chain, if a 300-year-old painting can be 
tracked back only sixty years and then we have no idea in what 
home or museum it was hanging, the forgery warning flags go up. 
Because the rewards of forgery in fine art are high, collectors must 
be very cautious. Where the MJ-12 documents are most vulner-
able and suspect is exactly on this question of provenance - the 
evidence miraculously dropped on a doorstep like something out 
of a fairy story, perhaps 'The Shoemaker and the Elves'. 
There are many cases in human history of a similar character -
where a document of dubious provenance suddenly appears 
carrying information of great import which strongly supports the 
case of those who have made the discovery. After careful and in 
some cases courageous investigation the document is proved to be 
a hoax. There is no difficulty in understanding the motivation of 
the hoaxers. A more or less typical example is the book of 
Deuteronomy - discovered hidden in the Temple in Jerusalem by 
King Josiah, who, miraculously, in the midst of a major reforma-
tion struggle, found in Deuteronomy confirmation of all his views. 
Another case is what is called the Donation of Constantine. 
Constantine the Great is the Emperor who made Christianity the 
official religion of the Roman Empire. The city of Constantinople 
(now Istanbul), for over a thousand years the capital of the 
Eastern Roman Empire, was named after him. He died in the year 
335. In the ninth century, references to the Donation of Constan-
tine suddenly appeared in Christian writings; in it Constantine 
wills to his contemporary, Pope Sylvester I, the entire Western 
Roman Empire, including Rome. This little gift, so the story 
went, was partly in gratitude for Sylvester's cure of Constantine's 
leprosy. By the eleventh century, popes were regularly referring 
to the Donation of Constantine to justify their claims to be not 
only the ecclesiastical but also the secular rulers of central Italy. 
Through the Middle Ages the Donation was judged genuine both 
by those who supported and by those who opposed the temporal 
claims of the Church. 
Lorenzo of Valla was one of the polymaths of the Italian 
88 


Spoofing and Secrecy 
Renaissance. A controversialist, crusty, critical, arrogant, a ped-
ant, he was attacked by his contemporaries for sacrilege, impu-
dence, temerity and presumption, among other imperfections. 
After he concluded that the Apostles' Creed could not on 
grammatical grounds have actually been written by the Twelve 
Apostles, the Inquisition declared him a heretic, and only the 
intervention of his patron, Alfonso, King of Naples, prevented his 
immolation. Undeterred, in 1440, he published a treatise demon-
strating that the Donation of Constantine is a crude forgery. The 
language in which it was written was to fourth century court Latin 
as Cockney was to the King's English. Because of Lorenzo of 
Valla, the Roman Catholic Church no longer presses its claim to 
rule European nations because of the Donation of Constantine. 
This work, whose provenance has a five-century hole in it, is 
generally understood to have been forged by a cleric attached to 
the Church's curia around the time of Charlemagne, when the 
papacy (and especially Pope Adrian I) was arguing for unification 
of church and state. 
Assuming they both belong to the same category, the MJ-12 
documents are a cleverer hoax than the Donation of Constantine. 
But on matters of provenance, vested interest and lexicographic 
inconsistencies, they have much in common. 
A cover-up to keep knowledge of extraterrestrial life or alien 
abductions almost wholly secret for forty-five years, with hun-
dreds if not thousands of government employees privy to it, is a 
remarkable notion. Certainly, government secrets are routinely 
kept, even secrets of substantial general interest. But the ostensi-
ble point of such secrecy is to protect the country and its citizens. 
Here, though, it's different. The alleged conspiracy of those with 
security clearances is to keep from the citizens knowledge of a 
continuing alien assault on the human species. If extraterrestrials 
really were abducting millions of us, it would be much more than a 
matter of national security. It would affect the security of all 
human beings everywhere on Earth. Given such stakes, is it 
plausible that no one with real knowledge and evidence, in nearly 
200 nations, would blow the whistle, speak out and side with the 
humans rather than the aliens? 
Since the end of the Cold War NASA has been flailing about, 
89 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
trying to find missions that justify its existence - particularly a 
good reason for humans in space. If the Earth were being visited 
daily by hostile aliens, wouldn't NASA leap on this opportunity to 
augment its funding? And if an alien invasion were in progress, 
why would the Air Force, traditionally led by pilots, step back 
from manned spaceflight and launch all its payloads on unmanned 
boosters? 
Consider the former Strategic Defense Initiative Organization, 
in charge of 'Star Wars'. It's fallen on hard times now, particularly 
its objective of basing defences in space. Its name and perspective 
have been demoted. It's the Ballistic Missile Defense Organiza-
tion these days. It no longer even reports directly to the Secretary 
of Defense. The inability of such technology to protect the United 
States against a massive attack by nuclear-armed missiles is 
manifest. But wouldn't we want at least to attempt deployment of 
defences in space if we were facing an alien invasion? 
The Department of Defense, like similar ministries in every 
nation, thrives on enemies, real or imagined. It is implausible in 
the extreme that the existence of such an adversary would be 
suppressed by the very organization that would most benefit from 
its presence. The entire post-Cold War posture of the military and 
civilian space programmes of the United States (and other 
nations) speaks powerfully against the idea that there are aliens 
among us - unless, of course, the news is also being kept from 
those who plan the national defence. 
Just as there are those who accept every UFO report at face value, 
there are also those who dismiss the idea of alien visitation out of 
hand and with great passion. It is, they say, unnecessary to 
examine the evidence, and 'unscientific' even to contemplate the 
issue. I once helped to organize a public debate at the annual 
meeting of the American Association for the Advancement of 
Science between proponent and opponent scientists of the propo-
sition that some UFOs were spaceships; whereupon a distin-
guished physicist, whose judgement in many other matters I 
respected, threatened to set the Vice President of the United 
States on me if I persisted in this madness. (Nevertheless, the 
debate was held and published, the issues were a little better 
90 


Spoofing and Secrecy 
clarified, and I did not hear from Spiro T. Agnew.) 
A 1969 study by the National Academy of Sciences, while 
recognizing that there are reports 'not easily explained', con-
cluded that 'the least likely explanation of UFOs is the hypothesis 
of extraterrestrial visitations by intelligent beings'. Think of how 
many other 'explanations' there might be: time travellers; demons 
from witchland; tourists from another dimension - like Mr 
Mxyztplk (or was it Mxyzptlk? I always forget) from the land of 
Zrfff in the Fifth Dimension in the old Superman comic books; the 
souls of the dead; or a 'noncartesian' phenomenon that doesn't 
obey the rules of science or even of logic. Each of these 'explana-
tions' has in fact been seriously proffered. 'Least likely' is really 
saying something. This rhetorical excess is an index of how 
distasteful the whole subject has become to many scientists. 
It's telling that emotions can run so high on a matter about 
which we really know so little. This is especially true of the more 
recent flurry of alien abduction reports. After all, if true, either 
hypothesis - invasion by sexually manipulative extraterrestrials or 
an epidemic of hallucinations - teaches us something we certainly 
ought to know about. Maybe the reason for strong feelings is that 
both alternatives have such unpleasant implications. 
Aurora 
The number of reports and their consistency suggest that 
there may be some basis for these sightings other than 
hallucinogenic drugs. 
Mystery Aircraft 
report, Federation of American Scientists 
20 August, 1992 
A
urora is a high-altitude, extremely secret American 
reconnaissance aircraft, a successor to the U-2 and the 
SR-71 Blackbird. It either exists or it doesn't. By 1993, there 
91 


THE DEMON-HAUNTED WORLD 
were reports by observers near California's Edwards Air 
Force Base and Groom Lake, Nevada, and particularly a 
region of Groom Lake called Area 51 where experimental 
aircraft for the Department of Defense are tested, that 
seemed by and large mutually consistent. Confirming reports 
were filed from all over the world. Unlike its predecessors, 
the aircraft is said to be hypersonic, to travel much faster, 
perhaps six to eight times faster, than the speed of sound. It 
leaves an odd contrail described as 'donuts-on-a-rope'. Per-
haps it is also a means of launching small secret satellites into 
orbit, developed, it is speculated, after the Challenger disas-
ter indicated the shuttle's episodic unreliability for defence 
payloads. But the CIA 'swears up and down there's no such 
programme', says US Senator and former astronaut John 
Glenn. The principal designer of some of the most secret US 
aircraft says the same thing. A Secretary of the Air Force has 
vehemently denied the existence of such an airplane, or any 
programme to build one, in the US Air Force or anywhere 
else. Would he lie? 'We have looked into all such sightings, as 
we have for UFO reports,' says an Air Force spokesman, in 
perhaps carefully chosen words, 'and we cannot explain 
them.' Meanwhile, in April 1995 the Air Force seized 4,000 
more acres near Area 51. The area to which public access is 
denied is growing. 
Consider then the two possibilities: that Aurora exists, and 
that it does not. If it exists, it's striking that an official 
cover-up of its very existence has been attempted, that 
secrecy could be so effective, and that the aircraft could be 
tested or refuelled all over the world without a single 
photograph of it or any other hard evidence being published. 
On the other hand, if Aurora does not exist, it's striking that a 
myth has been propagated so vigorously and gone so far. 
Why should insistent official denials have carried so little 
weight? Could the very existence of a designation -Aurora in 
this case - serve to pin a common label on a range of diverse 
phenomena? Either way, Aurora seems relevant to UFOs. 
92 


6 
Hallucinations 
[A]s children tremble and fear everything in the blind 
darkness, so we in the light sometimes fear what is no more 
to be feared than the things children in the dark hold in 
terror . . . 
Lucretius, On the Nature of Things 
(c. 60 BC) 
A
dvertisers must know their audiences. It's a simple matter of 
product and corporate survival. So we can learn how com-
mercial, free-enterprise America views UFO buffs by examining 
the advertisements in magazines devoted to UFOs. Here are some 
(entirely typical) ad headlines from an issue of UFO Universe: 
• Senior Research Scientist Discovers 2,000-Year-Old Secret to 
Wealth, Power, and Romantic Love. 
• Classified! Above Top Secret. The Most Sensational Govern-
ment Conspiracy of Our Time Is Finally Revealed to the World 
by a Retired Military Officer. 
• What Is Your 'Special Mission' While on Earth? The Cosmic 
Awakening of Light Workers, Walk-Ins, & All Star-Born 
Representatives Has Begun! 
• This Is What You Have Been Waiting For. 24 Superb, Incred-
ible Life-Improving UFO Seals of the Spirits. 
• I Got a Girl. Do You? Stop Missing Out! Get Girls Now! 
93 
